20. The mayor of a small city receives
suddenly the news that a revisor, a secret
examiner, is on the way from the capital to
investigate his administration. Quickly he
assembles all the worthies of the town, the
director of schools, of prisons, of hospitals,
all of whom have but too guilty consciences,
and they all decide on measures of escape
from his wrath. They march in file to the
hotel where the supposed Revisor lodges.
There for some days had been dwelling a
young penniless good-for-nothing whom the
officials mistake for the dreaded Revisor.
The young man is surprised, but soon accepts
the situation, and plays his part admirably.
Presents and bribes are sent him
from all sides; he borrows money right and
left, makes love to the mayor's wife as well
as to his daughter, and finally engages to
marry the—daughter. The mayor is happy
and honored as never before, and relying
 upon the protection of the Revisor outrages
the community now more than ever. At last
the pseudo-revisor departs with all the gifts
and loans, and in a few days the real Revisor
actually arrives, to the astonishment and dismay
of the officials, who till now had felt
secure in their misdeeds.
21. “The Revisor” is indeed a great comedy,
the equal of Griboyedof's “Misfortune
from Brains.” As a comedy it is therefore
the inferior of none,—neither of Terence,
nor of Molière. But as a work of art it cannot
rank as high as “Taras Bulba,” because
no comedy can ever be as great a thing of
beauty as an epic poem. What rouses laughter
cannot rank as high as what rouses tender
emotion. Moreover, with the passing away of
the generation familiar with the corruption
it satirizes, the comedy often becomes unintelligible
save to scholars. Hence the utter
valuelessness to us of to-day of the comedies
of Aristophanes as works of wit. Their only
value to-day is as fragmentary records of
Greek manners. The comedy is thus writ
not for all times, but only for a time; while
 “Taras Bulba,” though generations come
and generations go, will ever appeal unto
men as a thing of imperishable beauty. But
while “The Revisor” is below “Taras Bulba”
as a work of art, it is far above it as a work
of purpose, and has accordingly accomplished
a greater result. For “Taras Bulba” can
only give pleasure, though it be read for
thousands of years after “The Revisor” has
been forgotten. It will indeed give a noble
pleasure, at which the soul need not blush,
still it is only a pleasure. But “The Revisor”
has helped to abolish corruption, has
fought the Evil One, has therefore done
work which, transient though it be, must be
done to bring about the one result which
alone is permanent,—the kingdom of heaven
upon earth; the kingdom of truth, the kingdom
of love, the kingdom of worship. And
whatever helps towards the establishment of
that on earth must be of a higher rank than
what only gives pleasure unto the soul.
22. The success of “The Revisor” spurred
the young Gogol on to further effort, and he
now resolved to give utterance to protest
 against another crying wrong of Russian life,
which in its consequences was far more disastrous
to the country than official corruption.
Gogol now undertook to lay bare the ills
of serfdom. His soul had long since been
searching for its activity a field as wide as life
itself. With Gogol, as with all lofty souls before
they find their truest self, aspiration ever
soared above execution. Now, however, the
time had arrived when his gifts could execute
whatever his soul conceived; and his
mighty spirit at last found fitting expression
in “Dead Souls.” Accordingly “Dead Souls”
is not so much a story, a story of an event
or of a passion, as a panorama of the whole
country. In his search for Dead Souls,
Tchichikof has to travel through the length
and breadth of the land; through village
and through town, through sunshine and
through storm, by day and by night, through
the paved imperial post-road as well as
through the forsaken cross-lane. This enables
Gogol to place before the reader not
only the governor of the province, the judge,
and the rich landowner, the possessor of hundreds
 of souls, but also the poverty-stricken,
well-nigh ruined landowner; not only the
splendor of the city, but also the squalor of
the hamlet; not only the luxury of an invited
guest, but also the niggardliness of the hotel-boarder.
“Dead Souls” is thus a painting
in literature,—what Kaulbach's “Era of the
Reformation” is in history. And the originality
of the execution lies in the arrangement
which presents Russia in a view unseen as yet
even by Pushkin, who knew his country but
too well. Gogol may be said to have discovered
Russia for the Russian, as Haxthausen
discovered it for the West, and as De
Tocqueville discovered America for the Americans.
“Great God!” exclaimed Pushkin,
on reading “Dead Souls,” “I had no idea
Russia was such a dark country!” And this
is the characteristic of this among the greatest
of paintings of Russian life,—the faithful
gloom which overhangs the horizon. In
spite of its humor, the impression left on the
mind by “Dead Souls” is that of the sky during
an equinoctial storm; and on closing the
book, in spite of your laughter, you feel as
if you had just returned from a funeral. The
 work is conceived in humor, designed to
rouse laughter, but it is laughter which shines
through tears. It is the laughter of a soul
which can no longer weep outwardly, but
inwardly. It is the same laughter which Lessing
indulged in when his wife and child were
snatched from him both at once. For six
long weary years he had battled with poverty,
disappointment, and despair, to reach at last
in joy the goal of his life; he weds at last
his beloved dame, and lo, the close of the
first year of his paradise finds mother and
babe lying side by side—lifeless. Lessing
laughs. He writes to a friend: “The poor
little fellow hath early discovered the sorrows
of this earth, so he quickly hied himself hence,
and lest he be lonely, took his mother along.”
There is laughter here, indeed, but the soul
here laughs with a bleeding, torn, agonized
heart. It is the same laughter which was
roused among the disciples of Christ when
they heard their Master utter the grim joke,
“Verily, it is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of the needle, than for a rich man to
enter the kingdom of heaven.” Such laughter
is Gogol's in “Dead Souls.” Gogol had now
 learned to comprehend the words of his
friend Ivanof,—“Christ never laughed.”
23. I dwell on this phase of Gogol's laughter,
because Gogol in his “Dead Souls” unconsciously
recognized that behind everything
laughable there is at bottom not a comedy
but a tragedy; that at bottom it is the cold
head only which laughs, and not the warm
heart. Think, and thou shalt laugh; feel,
and thou shalt weep. Judgment laughs, sympathy
weeps. Sin, wickedness, O my friends,
is not a thing to laugh at, but a thing to weep
at; and your English humorists have not yet
learned, when they must laugh at vice and
sin, to laugh at it with a heart full of woe.
Swift is steeped in vinegar; Fielding's humor
is oiled and sugar-coated; Dickens can
never laugh unless with convulsive explosion;
Thackeray sneers, and George Eliot is almost
malicious with her humor; and the only man
in English literature who is sick at heart while
he laughs is not even counted among the humorists,—Carlyle.
In English literature the
laughter of Cervantes in Don Quixote is unknown;
but the humor of Cervantes is nearest
that of Gogol. Gogol's laughter is the
 laughter of a man who so loves his fellow-men
that their weakness is his pain; and the
warmest corner in all Russia for the very men
Gogol satirizes would doubtless have been
found in his own heart. It is this spirit in
which “Dead Souls” is writ which makes
“Dead Souls” a model for all humorous
writing.
24. I can give you, however, no nobler example
of this laughter through tears by Gogol
than the following closing passage from his
“Memoirs of a Maniac.” You remember that
during his stay at St. Petersburg, Gogol fell
in love with a woman far above his social
rank. In this piece of only twenty pages
Gogol paints the mental condition of an
humble office-scribe, who, falling in hopeless
love with the daughter of his chief, loses his
poor mind. After various adventures he at
last imagines himself King Ferdinand of
Spain, is locked up in an asylum, and is
beaten whenever he speaks of himself as the
king. And this is the last entry in the poor
maniac's diary:—