Heine has taken the evergreen pine in the
cold clime, as the emblem of this longing,
and a most noble emblem it is. But I cannot
help feeling that in choosing a fallen angel, as
Pushkin has on the same subject, he was enabled
to give it a zenith-like loftiness and a
nadir-like depth not to be found in Heine.
20. Hitherto we have followed Pushkin only
through his unconscious song; only through
 that song of which his soul was so full as to
find an outlet, as it were, without any deliberate
effort on his part. But not even unto the
bard is it given to remain in this childlike
health. For Nature ever works in circles.
Starting from health, the soul indeed in the
end arrives at health, but only through the
road of disease. And a good portion of
the conscious period in the life of the soul
is taken up by doubt, by despair, by disease.
Hence when the singer begins to reflect,
to philosophize, his song is no longer
that of health. This is the reason why Byron
and Shelley have borne so little fruit. Their
wail is the cry not of a mood, but of their
whole being; it is not the cry of health temporarily
deranged, but the cry of disease.
With the healthy Burns, on the other hand,
his poem, “Man was made to Mourn,” reflects
only a stage which all growing souls
must pass. So Pushkin, too, in his growth, at
last arrives at a period when he writes the
following lines, not the less beautiful for being
the offspring of disease, as all lamentation
must needs be:—
21. Once passed through its mumps and
measles, the soul of the poet now becomes
conscious of its heavenly gift, and begins to
have a conscious purpose. The poet becomes
moralized, and the song becomes
ethical. This is the beginning of the final
stage, which the soul, if its growth continue
healthy, must reach; and Pushkin, when singing,
does retain his health. Accordingly in his
address to the Steed, the purpose is already
clearly visible.
22. It is thus that the singer lifts up his voice
against the terrors of war. It is thus that he
protests against the struggle between brother
and brother; and the effect of the protest
is all the more potent that it is put into
the mouth, not as Nekrassof puts it, of the
 singer, but into that of a dumb, unreasoning
beast.
23. We have now reached the last stage of
the development of Pushkin's singing soul.
For once conscious of a moral purpose, he
cannot remain long on the plane of mere
protest; this is mere negation. What is to
him the truth must likewise be sung, and he
utters the note of affirmation; this in his
greatest poem,—