“Meanwhile, along with the evening was approaching
a thunder-storm. Already ever since
noon the air had been close, and from the distance
there was coming a low grumbling. But
now the broad cloud that had long been resting
like a layer of lead on the very edge of the horizon
began to grow, and to be visible from behind
the trees: the stifling atmosphere began
to tremble more visibly, shaken stronger and
stronger by the approaching thunder; the wind
rose, howled abruptly through the trees, became
still, howled again protractedly, and now
it whistled. A sombre darkness ran over the
ground, chasing swiftly away the last glimmer
of the dawn; the thick clouds breaking to
pieces suddenly began to float, and drove
through the sky; now, a slight shower began
to sprinkle, the lightning flared up with a red
flame, and the thunder growled angrily and
heavily.”
22. Observe here the felicity of the metaphor:
the cloud rests, the air trembles and
is soon shaken, the darkness runs over the
ground, and the thunder growls in anger.
 Only the eye which sees at bottom life in
Nature's forces could see them in such vivifying
images.
23. Lastly, the fourth great virtue of Turgenef's
art is his intense power of sympathy.
24. In the universality of his sympathies he
is equalled again only by Tolstoy. Like him
he can depict the feelings of a dog, of a bird,
with a self-attesting fidelity, as if his nature
were at one with theirs; and the one child
of creation which man has repeatedly been
declared unable to paint truthfully, namely,
woman, Turgenef has painted with a grace
and faithfulness unapproached even by George
Eliot or by George Sand. For Turgenef
loved woman as no woman could love her,
and his faith in her was unbounded. Hence,
when in his “On the Eve” he wishes to give
expression to his despair over the men of
Russia, so that he has to seek the ideal of a
patriot not in a Russian, but in a Bulgarian,
he still rests the hope of the country on its
women; and Helen, Turgenef's noblest conception
among women, as Insarof is among
men, is not like him a foreigner, but a Russian.
 And this is how Turgenef paints the
noblest moment in the life of the noblest of
his women.
25. The poor, prospectless foreigner Insarof
discovers that he loves the rich, high-stationed
Helen. He does not know that he
is loved in return, and he decides to depart
without taking even leave of her. They meet,
however, unexpectedly.