15. For a poem of this class this is a veritable
gem; for not only is its theme a thing of
beauty, but it is a thing of tender beauty.
Who is there among my hearers that can contemplate
this birdlet, this wee child of God,
as the poet hath contemplated it, and not feel
a gentleness, a tenderness, a meltedness creep
into every nook and corner of his being? But
the lyric beauty of the form, and the tender
emotion roused in our hearts by this poem,
form by no means its greatest merit. To me
the well-nigh inexpressible beauty of these
lines lies in the spirit which shineth from
them,—the spirit of unreserved trust in the
fatherhood of God. “When fog and rain
by the late fall are brought, men are wearied,
men are grieved, but birdie—” My friends,
 the poet has written here a commentary on
the heavenly words of Christ, which may well
be read with immeasurable profit by our wiseacres
of supply-and-demand economy, and
the consequence-fearing Associated or Dissociated
Charity. For if I mistake not, it
was Christ that uttered the strangely unheeded
words, “Be not anxious for the morrow.…
Behold the birds of the heaven, that
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into barns, and your heavenly Father feedeth
them.” Fine words these, to be read reverently
from the pulpit on Sunday, but to be
laughed at in the counting-room and in the
charity-office on Monday. But the singer
was stirred by this trustfulness of birdie, all
the more beautiful because unconscious, and
accordingly celebrates it in lines of well-nigh
unapproachable tenderness and grace!
16. There is, however, one realm of creation
yet grander and nobler than that visible
to the eye of the body. Higher than
the visible stands the invisible; and when the
soul turns from the contemplation of the outward
universe to the contemplation of the inward
 universe, to the contemplation of affection
and aspiration, its flight must of necessity
be higher. Hence the high rank of those
strains of song which the soul gives forth
when stirred by affection, by love to the
children of God, whether they be addressed
by Wordsworth to a butterfly, by Burns to
a mouse, or by Byron to a friend. You
have in English eight brief lines which for
this kind of song are a model from their
simplicity, tenderness, and depth.
17. It is this song of love for one's kind
which makes Burns, Heine, and Goethe pre-eminently
the singers of the human heart
when it finds itself linked to one other heart.
 And it is this strain which gives everlasting life
to the following breath of Pushkin's muse:
18. But from the love of the individual the
growing soul comes in time to the love of the
race; or rather, we only love an individual
because he is to us the incorporation of some
 ideal. And let the virtue for which we love
him once be gone, he may indeed keep our
good will, but our love for him is clean gone
out. This is because the soul in its ever-upward,
heavenward flight alights with its
love upon individuals solely in the hope of
finding here its ideal, its heaven realized.
But it is not given unto one person to fill the
whole of a heaven-searching soul. Only the
ideal, God alone, can wholly fill it. Hence the
next strain to that of love for the individual
is this longing for the ideal, a longing for
what is so vague to most of us, a longing
to which therefore not wholly inappropriately
the name has been given of a longing
for the Infinite.
19. And of this longing, Heine has given in
eight lines immeasurably pathetic expression: