17. For the first great virtue of Turgenef's
art is his matchless sense of form, as of a
builder, a constructor, an architect. As works
of architecture, of design, with porch and
balcony, and central body, and roof, all in
harmonious proportion, his six novels are unapproachable.
There is a perfection of form
in them which puts to shame the hopelessly
groping attempts at beauty of harmonious
form of even the greatest of English men
of letters. As a work of architecture, for
instance, “Virgin Soil” bears the same relation
to the “Mill on the Floss” that the
Capitol at Washington bears to the Capitol
at Albany. The one is a rounded-out thing
of beauty, the other an angular monstrosity.
Walter Scott in England, and Mr. Howells
in America, are the only English writers of
fiction who possess that sense of form which
makes Turgenef's art consummate; unfortunately,
Walter Scott has long since been discarded
as a literary model, and Mr. Howells
is not yet even accepted.
18. And the second great virtue of Turgenef's
art is the skill with which he contrives
to tell the most with the least number of
words, the skill with which he contrives to
produce the greatest effect with the least expenditure
of force. There is a compactness
in his stories which I can only describe as
Emersonian. Of his six great novels, only
one has as many as three hundred pages; of
the other five, not one has over two hundred.
Turgenef's art is thus in striking contrast with
that required by the English standard of three
volumes for every novel. For what is to English
and American society the greatest of social
virtues was to Turgenef the greatest of
artistic vices. As an artist, Turgenef detested
above all cleverness,—that accomplishment
which possesses to perfection the art of smuggling
in a whole cartload of chaff under the
blinding glare of a single phosphorescent
thoughtlet; that cleverness which like all
phosphorescent glows can only change into
a sickly paleness at the slightest approach of
God's true sunlight, of the soul's true force.
Of this virtue of compactness his works offer
 examples on almost every page; but nowhere
are its flowers strewn in such abundance as in
his “Diary of a Superfluous Man.”
19. This work, though only covering some
sixty pages, written as it was at the age of
thirty-two, when Turgenef stood as yet at the
threshold of his artistic career, is in fact, as it
were, an epitome of all Turgenef's forces as
an artist. While in power of impression it
is the peer of Tolstoy's “Ivan Ilyitsh,” with
which it has a striking family resemblance, it
surpasses Tolstoy's sketch in the wealth of
delicately shaded gems of workmanship, which
glow throughout the worklet. (1) In the
small provincial town, for instance, the lion
from St. Petersburg, Prince N., captures the
hearts of all. A ball is given in his honor,
and the prince, says Turgenef, “was encircled
by the host, yes, encircled as England is
encircled by the sea.” My ball-giving, my
lion-hunting friend, thou knowest the singular
felicity of that one word here,—encircled!
(2) The superfluous man's beloved is at last
seduced by the lionized prince, and she becomes
the talk of the town. A good-natured
 lieutenant, now first introduced by Turgenef,
calls on the wretched man to console him,
and the unhappy lover writes in his Diary:
“I feared lest he should mention Liza. But
my good lieutenant was not a gossip, and,
moreover, he despised all women, calling
them, God knows why, salad.” This is all
the description Turgenef devotes to this lieutenant;
but this making him despise women
under the appellation of half-sour, half-sweet
conglomerate of egg-and-vegetable salad, describes
the lieutenant in two lines more faithfully
than pages of scientific, realistic photography.
(3) Before the ruin of poor Liza
becomes known, and while the prince, her
seducer, is still on the height of lionization,
he is challenged to a duel by Liza's faithful
lover. The superfluous man wounds the
prince's cheek; the prince, who deems his
rival unworthy of even a shot, retaliates by
firing into the air. Superfluous man is of
course crushed, annihilated, and he describes
his feelings thus:  “Evidently this man was
bound to crush me; with this magnanimity of
his he slammed me in, just as the lid of the
coffin is slammed down over the corpse.”
(4) You think, then, that the sufferings of the
despairing lover as he sees his beloved going
to ruin, into the arms of the seducer, are indescribable?
But not to Turgenef. Says again
the superfluous man in his Diary: “When
our sorrows reach a phase in which they
force our whole inside to quake and to
squeak like an overloaded cart, then they
cease to be ridiculous.” Verily, only those
who have been shaken to the very depths
of their being can understand the marvellous
fidelity of this image, the soul quaking and
squeaking like an overloaded cart,—all the
more faithful because of its very homeliness.
Do not wonder, therefore, when the
last, intensest grief, the consciousness of being
crushed by his rival, finds in his Diary the
following expression: (5) “And so I suffered,”
says the superfluous man, “like a dog
whose hind parts had been crushed in by the
cart-wheel as it passed over him.” A more
powerful description of agony, methinks, is
not found even in Gogol's laughter through
tears.
20. And the third great virtue of Turgenef's
art is his love of Nature; and here I know
not where to look for the like of him, unless to
another great master of Russian letters,—to
Tolstoy. For Gogol is indeed also a painter,
but only a landscape-painter, while Turgenef
makes you feel even the breeze of a summer
eve.
21. So thrilled is his being with the love of
Nature, that all her moods find a ready response
in his sensitive soul. The joy of the
sunshine, the melancholy of the sky shut down
by huge cloud, the grandeur of the thunder,
the quiver of the lightning, the glow of the
dawn, the babble of the brook, and even the
waving of the grass-blade,—all these he reproduces
with the fidelity of one who reveres
Nature. Turgenef has thus at least one element
of the highest religiousness,—reverence
towards the powers of Nature superior to
man; a reverence the possession of which
he himself would perhaps have been the first
to deny, since consciously he was an irreverent
agnostic. But his soul was wiser than his
logic; and however dead his head might declare
 the universe to be, his hand painted it
as if alive. This, for instance, is how he describes
a storm:—