“He gently raised up her head and looked
firmly into her eyes.
“‘So God be with you,’ he said; ‘be thou my
wife both before men and before God.’”
26. These, then, were the numerous great
virtues of Turgenef; and they have made
him the most enjoyable of artists. But his
one great vice, the vice of doubt, the vice of
hopelessness, has made him, as a nourisher
of the spirit, among the least profitable as a
writer.
27. For, O my friends, it cannot be stated
too often that whatever puts new strength
into the spirit is from the great God, the
Good; and whatever takes strength from the
spirit is from the great Devil, the Evil. And
the things that have ever proved the inexhaustible
sources of strength to the soul have
been not doubt and despair, but faith and
hope,—faith that the destinies of men are
guided by love even though guided through
the agony of sorrow; faith that behind this
appearance of discord and blind fate and
brute force there is after all to be found the
substance of harmony, of wise forethought,
of tender love; hope, that however terrible
the present, the future will yet be one of joy,
 one of peace. If reason with its logic can
strengthen this faith, this hope, then welcome
reason, blessed be reason; but if reason with
its logic can only make me doubt the presence
of wisdom, the presence of love, then
begone reason, cursed be reason. Verily, by
their fruits ye shall know them!
28. Turgenef therefore was incapable of
creating a Levin, because he had not the faith
which makes the Levins of Tolstoy possible.
He was filled with the pessimistic woe of
the world, believed at bottom that man,
born in sorrow, must also live in sorrow. With
the sublimity of a prophet, Turgenef cries:
“From the inmost depths of the virgin forest,
from the eternal depth of the waters,
resounds the same cry of Nature to man:
‘I have naught to do with thee. I rule, but
thou—look to thy life, O worm!’” While
personally he indeed contributed what lay in
his power to alleviate the present ills of men,
he could do naught towards alleviating the
future ills of men; for he could not inspire
men with hope, since he had none himself.
For hope comes from faith, and Turgenef
 was devoid of faith. Turgenef, like another
great master of fiction, George Eliot, was a
veritable child of the immature age, not of
science, of knowledge, but of nescience, of
ignorance, of agnosticism; for it is only ignorance
that doubts, and it is true science that
believes.