24. This is the highest flight of Pushkin.
He knew that the poet comes to deliver the
message. But what the message was, was
not given unto him to utter. For God only
speaks through those that speak for him, and
Pushkin's was not yet a God-filled soul.
Hence the last height left him yet to climb,
the height from which the “Hymn of Force”
is sung, Pushkin did not climb. Pushkin's
song, in short, was so far only an utterance
of a gift, it had not become as yet a part
 of his life. And the highest is only attainable
not when our lives are guided by our
gifts, but when our gifts are guided by our
lives. How this thus falling short of a natively
richly endowed soul became possible,
can be told only from a study of his life. To
Pushkin his poetic ideal bore the same relation
to his practical life that the Sunday
religion of the business-man bears to his
Monday life. To the ordinary business man,
Christ's words are a seeing guide to be followed
in church, but a blind enough guide,
not to be followed on the street. Hence
Pushkin's life is barren as a source of inspiration
towards what life ought to be; but it
is richly fruitful as a terrifying warning against
what life ought not to be.
25. Pushkin died at the age of thirty-eight, at
a time when he may be said to have just begun
to live. Once more then we have before
us a mere fragment, a mere possibility, a mere
promise of what the great soul was capable of
becoming, of what the great soul was perhaps
destined to become. Pushkin is thus a typical
example of the fate of the Slavonic soul.
 And the same phases we had occasion to observe
as gone through by the race, we now
find here likewise gone through by the individual.
It is this which makes Pushkin eminently
a national singer, a Russian singer. The
satire of Gogol, the synthesis of Turgenef, the
analysis of Tolstoy, might have indeed flourished
on any other soil. Nay, Turgenef and
Tolstoy are men before they are Russians;
but the strength of Pushkin as a force in
Russian literature comes from this his very
weakness. Pushkin is a Russian before he is
a man, his song is a Russian song; hence
though many have been the singers in Russia
since his day, none has yet succeeded in filling
his place. For many are indeed called,
but few are chosen; and the chosen Russian
bard was—Alexander Pushkin.
1. With the departure of the eighteenth
century there also disappeared from Russia
that dazzling glitter which for well-nigh half
a century had blinded the eyes of Europe.
Catherine was now dead, Potyomkin was
dead, Suvorof was living an exile in a village,
and Panin was idle on his estates. And now
stripped of its coat of whitewash, autocracy
stood bare in all its blackness. Instead of
mother-Catherine, Paul was now ruling, and
right fatherly he ruled! Such terror was inspired
by this emperor, that at the sight of
their father-Tsar his subjects at last began to
scamper in all directions like a troop of mice
at the sight of a cat. For half a decade
Russia was thus held in terror, until the rule
of the maniac could no longer be endured.
 At last Panin originates, Pahlen organizes, and
Benigsen executes a plan, the accomplishment
of which finds Paul on the morrow lying
in state with a purple face, and the marks of the
shawl which strangled him carefully hid by a
high collar. “His Majesty died of apoplexy,”
the populace is told. Alexander the Benign
comes upon the throne, greeted, indeed, by
his subjects, in the ecstasy of the delivery,
like an angel, but cursed by them as a demon
ere the five-and-twenty years of his rule have
passed. The Holy Alliance, Shishkof and
Arakcheyef were more than even Russians
could endure, and formidable protest is at last
made by the armed force of the Decembrists.
The protest fails; five bodies swinging from
the gallows, and a hundred exiles buried in
Siberia alive, leave a monument of such failure
terrible in its ghastliness even for Russian
history. The iron hand of Nicholas now
rests on the country, and for thirty years the
autocrat can proudly say that now order
reigns in Russia. Order? Yes; but it is the
order and quiet of the graveyard, the peace
of death.
2. But not all is quiet. Defeated on the
field of arms, the spirit of protest seeks and
at last finds a battle-field where neither the
trampling hoofs of horses nor the shot of
cannon can avail. The spirit of man intrenches
itself behind ideas, behind letters,
and here it proves impregnable even against
the autocracy of a Nicholas. Defeated on
the field of war, the spirit of man protests in
literature. The times call for the voice, and
the voice is soon heard. This voice is the
voice of Nicolai Gogol.
3. Gogol is the protester, the merciless
critic of the weakness of autocracy. I have
placed Pushkin, the greatest of Russia's singers,
as among the least of its writers, because
he hath no purpose. I place Gogol far above
Pushkin, because Gogol is the first master of
Russian literature in whom purpose is not
only visible, but is also shown. Gogol's art
protests not unconsciously; but the man
Gogol uses the artist Gogol as a means for
giving voice to the protest against what his
noble soul rebels.