1. I have stated in the first lecture that I
should treat of Pushkin as the singer. Pushkin
has indeed done much besides singing.
He has written not only lyrics and ballads
but also tales: tales in prose and tales in
verse; he has written novels, a drama, and
even a history. He has thus roamed far and
wide, still he is only a singer. And even a
cursory glance at his works is enough to show
the place which belongs to him. I say belongs,
because the place he holds has a prominence
out of proportion to the merits of the
writer. Among the blind the one-eyed is
king, and the one-eyed Pushkin—for the
moral eye is totally lacking in this man—came
when there as yet was no genuine song
 in Russia, but mere noise, reverberation of
sounding brass; and Pushkin was hailed as
the voice of voices, because amidst the universal
din his was at least clear. Of his most
ambitious works, “Boris Godunof” is not a
drama, with a central idea struggling in the
breast of the poet for embodiment in art, but
merely a series of well-painted pictures, and
painted not for the soul, but only for the eye.
His “Eugene Onyegin” contains many fine
verses, much wit, much biting satire, much
bitter scorn, but no indignation burning out
of the righteous heart. His satire makes you
smile, but fails to rouse you to indignation.
In his “Onyegin,” Pushkin often pleases you,
but he never stirs you. Pushkin is in literature
what the polished club-man is in society.
In society the man who can repeat the most
bon-mots, tell the most amusing anecdotes,
and talk most fluently, holds the ear more
closely than he that speaks from the heart.
So Pushkin holds his place in literature because
he is brilliant, because his verse is polished,
his language chosen, his wit pointed,
his prick stinging. But he has no aspiration,
 no hope; he has none of the elements which
make the writings of the truly great helpful.
Pushkin, in short, has nothing to give. Since
to be able to give one must have, and Pushkin
was a spiritual pauper.
2. And what is true of his more sustained
works, is equally true of his lesser works.
They all bear the mark of having come from
the surface, and not from the depths. His
“Prisoner of the Caucasus,” his “Fountain of
Bachtshisarai,” his “Gypsies,” are moreover
weighted down with the additional load of
having been written directly under the influence
of Byron. And as health is sufficient
unto itself and it is only disease which is
contagious, Byron, who was sick at heart himself,
could only impart disease and not health.
Byron moreover had besides his gift of song
the element of moral indignation against corrupt
surroundings. Pushkin had not even this
redeeming feature.
3. Pushkin therefore is not a poet, but only
a singer; for he is not a maker, a creator.
There is not a single idea any of his works
can be said to stand for. His is merely a
 skill. No idea circulates in his blood giving
him no rest until embodied in artistic form.
His is merely a skill struggling for utterance
because there is more of it than he can hold.
Pushkin has thus nothing to give you to carry
away. All he gives is pleasure, and the pleasure
he gives is not that got by the hungry
from a draught of nourishing milk, but that
got by the satiated from a draught of intoxicating
wine. He is the exponent of beauty
solely, without reference to an ultimate end.
Gogol uses his sense of beauty and creative
impulse to protest against corruption, to give
vent to his moral indignation; Turgenef uses
his sense of beauty as a weapon with which
to fight his mortal enemy, mankind's deadly
foe; and Tolstoy uses his sense of beauty to
preach the ever-needed gospel of love. But
Pushkin uses his sense of beauty merely to
give it expression. He sings indeed like a
siren, but he sings without purpose. Hence,
though he is the greatest versifier of Russia,—not
poet, observe!—he is among the least
of its writers.
4. Towards the end of his early extinguished
 life he showed, indeed, signs of better things.
In his “Captain's Daughter” he depicts a
heroic simplicity, the sight of which is truly
refreshing, and here Pushkin becomes truly
noble. As a thing of purity, as a thing of
calmness, as a thing of beauty, in short, the
“Captain's Daughter” stands unsurpassed
either in Russia or out of Russia. Only
Goldsmith's “Vicar of Wakefield,” Gogol's
“Taras Bulba,” and the Swiss clergyman's
“Broom Merchant,” can be worthily placed
by its side. But this nobility is of the lowly,
humble kind, to be indeed thankful for as
all nobility must be, whether it be that of the
honest farmer who tills the soil in silence, or
that of the gentle Longfellow who cultivates
his modest muse in equal quietness. But
there is the nobility of the nightingale and
the nobility of the eagle; there is the nobility
of the lamb and the nobility of the lion; and
beside the titanesqueness of Gogol, and Turgenef,
and Tolstoy, the nobility of Pushkin,
though high enough on its own plane, is
relatively low.
5. Mere singer then that Pushkin is, he is
 accordingly at his best only in his lyrics. But
the essence of a lyric is music, and the essence
of music is harmony, and the essence
of harmony is form; hence in beauty of form
Pushkin is unsurpassed, and among singers
he is peerless. His soul is a veritable Æolian
harp. No sooner does the wind begin to
blow than his soul is filled with music. His
grace is only equalled by that of Heine, his
ease by that of Goethe, and his melody by
that of Tennyson. I have already said that
Pushkin is not an eagle soaring in the
heavens, but he is a nightingale perched
singing on the tree. But this very perfection
of form makes his lyrics well-nigh untranslatable,
and their highest beauty can only
be felt by those who can read them in the
original.