22. Of course men have preached reform
ever since God had resolved that however
men may refuse to do his will, they shall at
least not fail to hear his voice as uttered by
his messengers. But though political freedom
had been preached by every thinking soul
 from Plato to Rousseau, it required an American
and a French Revolution to open a path
for the entrance of their ideas into practical life.
Religious freedom, too, had been preached
from the mouth of every soul that had the
genuine love for its kind in its heart. From
Christ to Emerson in our world, to say naught
of the heathen world, the burden of the song
of all saints has been, “Love your neighbor
as ye love yourselves.” Your neighbor, observe!
Not your Baptist neighbor, nor your
Methodist neighbor, nor even your infidel
neighbor, but your neighbor. Plain as this
teaching is, it still required Inquisitions, Bartholomew
nights, and Thirty-Year-Wars, to
establish not even religious brotherhood, but
only religious toleration.
23. Social brotherhood, too, has been
preached for ages, beginning with John the
Baptist, who in answer to the question, What
are we to do? can only say, “Whosoever hath
two coats, let him give one to him that hath
none,” and ending with John Ruskin, who,
smarting under the unequal distribution of
wealth, founds his Company of St. George.
 Preached then social brotherhood has been,
as all else has been preached; but acted out,
even under the guise of hypocrisy, it has not
yet been. Will this change of heart likewise
have to be brought about by blood and
slaughter?
24. Tolstoy, in the feeble way of a single
man, but in the mighty way of a single soul,
giveth unmistakable answer to this question.
We must begin the revolution, says he, not
without us, with others, but within us, with
ourselves; not by force of arms, but by force
of love. Of what use are alms handed out
with one hand, when with the other we uphold
idleness which is the creator of the need
of alms? Let each one work, he says, as
much as he can, and if he produce more
than his own needs, there will ever be enough
of the unfortunate and the ailing who cannot
produce enough for their own needs.
Not leisure, then, idleness, is the haven to
be steered for, but work; and work, too,
not such as shall pander to the wants of the
lazy, but to the wants of the industrious,—work,
in short, which shall enable others to
 enjoy that labor of the body and that rest
of the soul which alone in their union make
the perfect life.
25. In his Introduction to “My Religion,”
Tolstoy says that he has at last tasted that
joy and happiness which even death could
not take away. He has thus attained true
blessedness, that heavenly peace which falls
to the lot of all souls from whom love of self
and pride of intellect have forever fled. But
such heaven can be attained by human soul
only through struggle,—struggle often for life
and death with sin, with doubt, with faithlessness,
with despair. For the fable of Sisyphus
is not mere fable; this ever rolling back of
the stone to the hill-top for the tenth, for the
hundredth, for the thousandth time, is only
the history of the soul on its journey heavenward;
the gold, ere it be freed from the dross,
must be scorched, burnt, melted, dissolved;
and the soul, to be made pure in its turn,
must be likewise burnt, melted, fused. Think
not, therefore, that Shakespeare, ere he wrote
“To be or not to be,” had been perching on
 the tree and warbling right gladly all his days.
His sorrow is not indeed found in his plays,
but surely it was found in his life. Think not,
therefore, that the sportive, merry, joking Socrates
was gay through all the seventy years of
his life. Not from a gay heart came those
words spoken at the end of his days, “We approach
truth only in so far as we are removed
from life.” And lastly, my friends, not from
a gay heart flowed that gentle spirit, that
boundless love, of the possessor of whom
not once, in all the four Gospels, is recorded
the fact that he ever laughed! Verily, only
through sorrow can be reached the haven of
the soul, that union with God which is free from
pride of intellect and love of self. And so
Tolstoy's life too, ere he attained that heavenly
peace, was filled with sorrow immeasurable,
sorrow unspeakable. For fifteen years of his
life the thought of suicide was not out of his
mind for a day; he upon whom Fortune had
lavished every gift which in the opinion of
the world can alone make man happy, he
who had riches, fame, friends, position, admiration,
appreciation,—this man Tolstoy has
 for years to hide his gun lest he shoot himself,
and his towel lest he hang himself. Wherefore,
then, such misery? Because, my friends,
he was natively endowed with a heaven-aspiring
soul, between which and the doctrine of
the world there can be no peace. One
must perish, or the other,—either the doctrine
of the world, or his soul. His soul,
indeed, was destined not to perish; but the
devil in man dies hard, and for fifty years
the doctrine of the world held in him the
upper hand.
26. Hence though the essence of Tolstoy
is the preacher, he was during these fifty
years never the preacher alone; but this very
struggle in his soul between the powers of
Light on the one hand and the powers of
Darkness on the other is also the reason why
he never remained the artist alone. Like the
thread of Theseus in the labyrinth of Minos,
the preacher's vein is seldom, if ever, absent
from Tolstoy. Hence his “Morning of a
Proprietor,” written in 1852, at the age of
twenty-four, is as faithful an account of his
experience as a visitor among the poor as
 his “Census of Moscow,” written twenty-five
years later; hence his “Lutzen,” written
when he was yet under thirty, is as powerful
a plea for the beggar as his “What to
Do,” written at the end of his career. The
final detaching of the preacher from the artist
is not therefore a sudden resolve, but the outcome
of the life-long struggle of his spirit.
The detaching of the preacher from the artist
took place therefore in Tolstoy as the detaching
of the nourishing kernel takes place from
the castaway shell. When he found his haven
and saw that the only meaning of life can be
found solely in love of man, and in living and
in toiling for him, when the doctrine of the
world, in short, was defeated by the soul, then
the severance of the preacher from the artist
becomes complete, the shell is burst, and in
all its native nourishingness there at last lies
before us what is eternal of Tolstoy,—the
writings, not of the artist Tolstoy, but the
writings of the preacher Tolstoy.