8. And the first characteristic of the Russian
spirit is that it has no originating force.
In the economy of the Aryan household, of
which the Slavic race is but a member, each
member has hitherto had a special office in
the discharge of which its originating force
was to be spent. The German has thus done
the thinking of the race, the American by
his inventive faculty has done the physical
comforting of the race, the Frenchman the
refining of the race, the Englishman the
trading of the race; but the Russian has no
such force peculiar to him. The office of
the Slavonic race has hitherto been passive,
and its highest distinction has hitherto been
solely either to serve as a sieve through which
the vivifying waters of European thought shall
 pour upon the sleeping body of Asia, or as a
dead wall to stem the wild devastating flow of
Asiatic barbarism upon European civilization.
The virtue of the Slavonic race is thus first of
all passivity; and as the virtue of a pipe is to
be smooth and hollow, so the virtue of the
Russian is first of all passive receptivity.
9. Look not therefore for creative originality
in Russian literature. There is not a
single form of literary development that is
native to the Russian soil, not a single contribution
to philosophy, to art, to letters, the
form of which can be said to have been born
on Russian soil. Its literary forms, like its
civilization (or that which passes for its civilization),
have been borrowed bodily from the
west. But as action and reaction are always
equal, so this very limitation of the Russian
national character has been the source of
many virtues of spiritual life, which Europe
and America might well learn to acquire, all
the more now when western thought has matured
to such ripeness as to be nigh decay.
10. And herein you have the explanation
of the powerful hold Russian literature has
 suddenly gained upon thoughtful hearts.
Wiseacres, marvelling at the meaning of the
outburst of enthusiasm for Russian literature,
mutter “fashionable craze,” and henceforth
rest content. But, O my friends, believe it
not. Craze will go as craze has come, but the
permanent force in Russian literature which
now stirs the hearts of men is not to be disposed
of by gossip at tea-table. Fashion can
hug a corpse for a while, and proclaim its
ghastly pallor to be delicacy of complexion,
and the icy touch of its hand to be reserved
culture, but it cannot breathe the breath of
Life into what is dead. And the present enthusiasm
is kept awake, rest assured, not because
of fashion, but in spite of it. Craze
will surely go, but with it will not go that
which appeals in Russian literature to all
earnest souls, because of its permanent elements
over which fashion has no control.
11. For the Russians have elements in their
writings quite notable in themselves at all
times, but more notable now when letters
everywhere else seem to run to waste and
ruin,—elements without which all writing
 must become in due course of time so
much blacking of paper, and all speech
only so much empty sound; elements without
which all writing is sent off, not weighted
in one corner, that it may, like unto the toy,
after never so much swaying to and fro,
still find its upright equilibrium, but rather
like unto the sky-rocket, sent up into empty
space whizzing and crackling, to end in due
time in total explosion and darkness.
12. And of these elements the first is Intensity.
What the Russian lacks in originality
he makes up in strength; what he lacks in
breadth he makes up in depth. The Russian
is nothing if not intense. When he loves, he
loves with all his heart; when he adores, he
adores with all his soul; when he submits, he
submits with all his being; when he rebels,
he rebels with all his force. When Peter decides
to introduce western civilization into
his empire, it must be done in a day and
throughout the country at once; and if human
nature does not yield quickly enough to
the order for change from above, soldiers
must march about the streets with shears in
 their hands to cut off the forbidden beard
and long coat. When tyrant Paul dies by
the hands of assassins, a scene of joy at the
deliverance takes place which is only possible
on Russian streets: strangers fly into
each other's arms, embrace, kiss each other,
amid gratulations for the relief. When the
foreign invader is to be repelled, no sacrifice
is too great for the Russian; and he does
not shrink even from setting fire to his own
Mecca, the beloved mother Moscow. When
Alexander II. undertakes to liberate Russia,
he crowds all reforms upon it at once,—emancipation
of serfs, trial by jury, local self-government,
popular education. And when
an autocratic reaction arrives, it comes with
the same storm-like rapidity and ubiquity.
From a free country Russia is changed in
one night, through the pistol-shot of a Karakozof,
into a despotic country, just as if some
Herman had waved his magic wand, and with
his “presto, change,” had conjured up the
dead autocracy into life again. When finally
aristocratic youth is fired with the noble desire
to help the ignorant peasant, home, family,
 station, fortune, career, all is forsaken,
and youth goes forth to live with peasant,
like peasant, that it may the better instruct
him. This intensity which thus permeates
all life of Russia is likewise visible in its
literature; but while in practical life titanesqueness
is a drawback, in literature, which
is the nation's ideal life, it finds its most fruitful
field. Hence the Russian writer may oft,
indeed, be mistaken, frequently even totally
wrong, but he is never uninteresting, because
always powerful.