“That in which during almost a whole year
consisted the one, exclusive longing of Vronsky's
life, that which had supplanted all his former
wishes, that which to Anna had been a
dream of impossible, terrible, yet for this reason
all the more fascinating happiness,—this
 wish was at last gratified. Pale, with his lower
jaw trembling, he stood over her and begged
her to quiet herself, not knowing himself how
and what.
“‘Anna, Anna,’ he spake with trembling
voice. ‘Anna, for God's sake!’
“But the louder he spake, the lower sank her
head, once proud and glad, now abased; she
now crouched, and was sinking from the sofa,
where she had been sitting, to the floor, at his
feet. She would have fallen on the carpet had
he not supported her. ‘O my God, forgive
me!’ she sobbed, and pressed his hands to her
breast.
“So criminal and so guilty she felt herself,
that the only thing left her was to humiliate herself
and to beg forgiveness. But now she had
no one in life left her but him, and to him she
turns with prayer for forgiveness. As she gazed
at him she physically felt her degradation, and
she could say nothing more. And he on his
part felt what a murderer must feel when beholding
the body he has just deprived of its life.
This body, deprived by him of its life, was their
love, the first period of their love. There was
something horrible and repulsive in the memory
of that which was purchased at the terrible price
of shame. The shame of her moral nakedness
was stifling to her, and this stifling feeling communicated
itself also to him. But, in spite of
 all the horror before the body of the slain, the
body must be cut into pieces, must be hidden
away, and use must be made of what the murderer
had obtained by his murder.
“And as the murderer with fierceness, almost
with passion, throws himself upon the body and
drags it and hacks it, so he too kept covering
with kisses her face and her shoulders. She
kept his hand and moved not. Yes, these kisses,—this
it was which was bought with this her
shame. ‘Yes, and this one hand which will always
be mine is the hand of my—confederate.’
She raised this hand and kissed it. He dropped
on his knees and wished to see her face, but she
hid her face and said naught. At last, as if
making an effort over herself, she rose and
pushed him away. Her face was indeed as
handsome as ever, but it was now pitiful all
the more.