9. Crank, indeed! My friends, was there
ever a time when the great souls on whom
we must feed, if we are to live at all, were
proclaimed aught else but cranks and nuisances?
The children of Darkness are ever
abroad, and the messengers of Light are
never welcome unto them. Such a nuisance
was the noblest of the Greeks to his countrymen,
that they could not wait for his peaceful
departure, even though he was already on
the brink of the grave; and the old man of
seventy had to drink the poison to rid his
fellow-citizens of the burden of his presence.
Of the two noblest sons of Boston, which it
has yet produced in all the two hundred and
fifty years of its existence, one was dragged
through its streets with a rope round his neck,
 not by a mob of unkempt anarchists, but by
a mob of well-shaven, broadcloth-clad citizens,—by
the ancestors, perhaps, of the very
men who now can watch the statue of that
same Garrison from their plate-glass windows
on Commonwealth Avenue. And the other
was shunned as an ill-balanced intellect, and
abused by those who look upon themselves
as the best of his townsmen, so that a monument
to Wendell Phillips cannot even be
thought of at this late day. England's noblest
living voice, the voice of John Ruskin,
is at this very moment engaged in crying unto
his countrymen, “Good my friends, if ye keep
on howling at me as ye have done, I shall indeed
become insane; but I assure ye, up to
this hour, maugre your vociferous clamoring,
I am still in possession of my senses,
thank God!” And of America's greatest inspirer,
while his gentle spirit was still walking
on earth, Jeremiah Mason, the clear-headed
man, the far-seeing judge, the practical statesman,
could only utter the joke, ‘I don't read
Emerson; my gals do!’ And, O ye good
people, tell me, I pray ye, what reception
 would Christ himself be likely to receive at
the hands of your swallow-tailed butlers, were
he to appear at your doors without silver-headed
cane, without Parisian kid gloves, without
engraved pasteboard announcing him to be
the Scion of his Majesty King David? Would
not a mere glance at his bare feet, his flowing
garment, and his untrimmed hair be sufficient
to convince Mr. Butler that for such folk the
lady of the house is never at home, or if at
home, is just about to dress for dinner or to
go out for a drive, and therefore begs to be
excused? Yes, my friends, of the greatest,
of the noblest souls, it has ever been the lot
to be scorned, since their message of light is
ever unwelcome to the children of darkness;
and if against their characters not a word can
be said, recourse must be had to the abuse at
least of their intellects; and Christ and Tolstoy
are declared to be weak intellects! This
is the meaning of the cry raised against Tolstoy
as unbalanced, in this latest change of
his life from riches unto poverty.
10. Tolstoy, then, is nothing but a preacher
of Christ; and the first articulate utterance
 in his message is therefore that of boundless
faith in the practicability of living according
to Christ; that of insistence upon the literal
following of the words of Christ as a practical
guide of life.
11. And out of this emphasis of the supremacy
of Love comes the second articulate
utterance in the message of Tolstoy, which is
the supremacy of heart over head as a metaphysical
guide of life. For God ever revealeth
himself unto men, but he speaketh unto
them not through their cold intellects, but
through their warm hearts; not through logic,
but through love. The reasoner searches
God without man and finds him not; the
lover finds God within man in his heart, and
hath no need of searching him. Hence the
following significant utterance of Tolstoy in
his “Confession.” In his search for the answer
to the ever-recurring question, “Wherefore
shall I live?” he at last goes abroad to
find light:—
“My life abroad, and the intercourse with
Europe's most advanced scholars, still more
confirmed my faith in perfection as such; for
 the same faith I now found in them likewise.
In me this faith took the same form which it
takes in most of the educated men of our time.
Its watchword was—progress. Then I thought
that this word meant something. Its utter
meaninglessness I then could not yet understand.
Here I was tormented, like every living
soul, with the question, ‘How can I better my
life?’ and I answer, ‘Live in accordance with
progress.’ But this is exactly the answer of a
man borne along by wind and tide in a boat.
He puts the to him all-important question,
‘What direction must I steer for my safety?’
and he receives in answer, ‘Oh, we are borne
along somewhither!’
“All this I did not perceive at the time. Only
rarely not my reason but my feeling rebelled
against this universal superstition with which
men shield themselves against their failure to
comprehend the meaning of life. Thus while in
Paris the sight of capital punishment revealed
to me all the ghastliness of this superstition of
progress. When I beheld how the head was
severed from the body, and how the one and the
other each in turn thumped in the box, I understood
not with my reason, but with my whole
soul, that no theory of progress, no theory of
the reasonableness of our present mode of living,
could justify this one deed; that even if all
men ever since creation, on whatever theory,
 had found that this must be, I know that this
need not be; that this is evil; that the judge of
all this, what is good and needful, is not what
men say and do, is not the theory of progress,
but I with my heart.”