14. Conquer Fortune he indeed did. For
 in less than a month he found himself back
in St. Petersburg, now a sober, a wiser man.
The period of stress, of storm, was at an end,
and henceforth letters were chosen as his life-long
occupation. Bread, indeed, has to be
earned by all manner of makeshifts,—now by
serving as a scribe in some dreary government
hall, now by reading off mechanically
to university students what officially passes
as lectures; but the life of his soul, whatever
his body might busy itself with, was henceforth
given unto letters.
15. Henceforth, in order to make his life
most fruitful unto men, which is his constant
purpose, he is to write. But write what?
Gogol gazes into his heart, and there finds
the memories of the steppe, of the valiant
Cossaks, their prowess and their freedom.
His soul is filled at the sight of these with
a tenderness and beauty which give him
no rest until he pours them out over the
pages of his book, and “Taras Bulba” is
covered with a glory well-nigh unattained in
any language since the days of Homer. For
“Taras Bulba,” though only one of several
 stories in “Evenings on a Farm,” is among
them what the star Sirius is in the already
glorious heavens of a November midnight.
As a thing of beauty, of simple grandeur, of
wild strength, of heroic nobility, as a song,
in short, I do not hesitate to affirm that it
finds its like only in the Iliad. It is an epic
song, and a song not of an individual soul
but of a whole nation. Written down it
was indeed by the hands of Gogol, but composed
it was by the whole of Little Russia.
As the whole of heroic Greece sings in the
wrath of Achilles, so the whole of Cossakdom,
which in its robust truth and manly
simplicity is not unlike heroic Greece, sings
in “Taras Bulba.”
16. The poem is introduced as follows:—
“‘Just turn round, sonny! Well, I declare
if you are not ridiculous! What kind of a rig
have you on? Why, you look like priests! Are
they all dressed thus in the academy?’
“With these words old Bulba met his two sons
who came home from the Kief seminary to their
father. His sons had just got down from their
horses. They were two sturdy fellows, still
looking out from under their brows just like
 fresh seminary graduates. Their strong, healthy
faces were covered with the first down, as yet
untouched by a razor. They were much embarrassed
at such reception by their father, and they
stood motionless, with eyes fixed on the ground.