12. Trust ye, therefore, your heart ere you
trust your logic. Whatever the heart dictates
must be from God, logic or no logic; whatever
the heart rebels against must be from
the Devil, reason or no reason. Time never
yet was when the Devil lacked reasons; and
if he can find reasons nowhere else, he at last
finds them in science and in Scripture. Next
to the slaveholders themselves, the last to forsake
the sinking ship of slavery, were the
preachers of the gospel of the brotherhood
of man, who argued finely from Scripture
twisted for the purpose, that the great God
having made Mr. Preacher white and Mr.
Negro black, had therefore intended that
black shall be the minion of white. Time
never was when reason and logic most inexorable
could not find excuse most sufficient
for the shedding of blood of brother
by brother, for the burning of village and
 town, for the erecting of luxurious palace
within stone's-throw of the homeless. Time
never was when logic could not show the fine
propriety, nay, the utmost necessity, for competition
and struggle for existence; when
men, who might create a paradise of this
green earth of ours, if they but chose to help
one another, transform themselves into pigs,
jostling and pushing one another at the trough,
and grunting with satisfaction abundant at
having driven the weaker piglet off into starvation,—all
of which is our modern, necessary
competition in business; and this is
logical, reasonable, scientific struggle for existence!
13. No, no, my friends, let logic cry never
so loudly at the necessity of struggle for existence,
and competition for bread between
men, when the great God hath provided
enough for a hundredfold of the present
number of men if they but chose to help
one another. The heart saith it is wrong;
and whatever logic makes it out to be right
is accursed, is from the Devil; and it is for ye,
if ye are to become the children of the Prince
 of Light, and not the children of the Prince
of Darkness, to have none of such logic, and
trust the God within you, who dwelleth not
in your heads, but in your hearts.
14. And once more, out of this fundamental
idea of the supremacy of love and the
brotherhood of all men,—of all men, observe,—follows
the insistence of Tolstoy upon
the words of Christ,—“Give to him that
asketh.” For it is not for man to judge his
neighbor, but for God. To Tolstoy, therefore,
all men are his brothers, the unworthy as
well as the worthy; or rather, he never asks
whether they be worthy. To him therefore
the law of Christ stands not for utility, nor for
fear of consequence, but for mercy and trust
in God. Hence Tolstoy would never fear to
help from what are branded as sentimental
motives. And the third articulate utterance
in the message of Tolstoy is therefore the
supremacy in charity of the sentiment which
comes from God over the logic which comes
from the Devil.
15. Relief given from sentimental motives
(from mere love of helping for its own
 sake) only keeps the pauper population
alive, we are told by our scientific charities.
Heinous, indeed, is the awful crime of keeping
pauper population alive; and heinous, indeed,
is the crime of having any sentiment of
heart in an age of progress of species and
self-respecting supply and demand. Then
the great God who sendeth his sunshine
and his rain upon members of Associated
Charities as well as upon members of Dissociated
Charities, upon the worthy as well
as upon the unworthy, upon the properly
introduced as well as upon the improperly
introduced,—then his beneficence is verily
sentimental. Yes, my friends, the great God
is the great sentimentalist, for he blesseth
men and bestoweth his mercy upon them
not because they are deserving, but because
he loveth to be merciful. When the flower
buddeth forth in the spring with matchless
beauty, no label is tacked on to its stem with
ominous reminder: “Not to be gazed at by
the eyes of the unworthy. All worthy persons,
of good moral character, can obtain
tickets by applying to Archangel Michael.”
 When under His eternal laws the cooling
spring babbleth forth merrily from the cave,
whispering to the weary, heated wanderer,
“Come thou hither, and be refreshed,” no
sign-board is placed at its entrance: “Beware!
this spring is only for the worthy; members
of the pauper population are warned,
under penalty of law, not to trespass on these
premises.” Verily, I say unto ye, the Lord
God is the sentimentalist of sentimentalists!
16. And the Son of God, like unto his
Father, was also a sentimentalist. When the
sinner came unto him in her distress, he did
not inquire for her letters of introduction; he
did not inquire whether she was indorsed in
most acceptable society-fashion by the leading
ministers of the town. He did not lift
the skirts of his garments in scorn of the person
unworthy of his company; he gave no
orders to his butlers that when Madame Sinner
calls next he is not at home for her. Nay,
Christ did not even send down to the Central
Office of the Associated Charities to look up
poor sinner's record. Without much parley
he stretched forth his holy hand, gave it to
 his pauper sister, and with a voice of love
spake, “Go thy ways in peace, thou art forgiven!”
Verily, I say unto you, Christ was
a sentimentalist of sentimentalists.