13. In times when feebleness has become
so feeble as even to invent a theory, making
thinness of voice, weakness of stamina, and
general emasculation literary virtues; when
intellect can find adequate interest only in the
chess-puzzles of a Browning, and the sense
of humor can find adequate sustenance only
in the table-leaping antics of a Mark Twain,
and the conscience can be goaded into remorse
only by the sight of actual starvation,
it is well to turn to these Russians and learn
that one of the secrets of their overwhelming
power is their intensity.
14. Gogol, for instance, never sets you
laughing explosively. Such laughter is only
on the surface; but you can hardly read a
page of his without feeling a general sense
of mirth suffused as it were through every
limb, and the cheek can laugh no more than
the spinal column. So, too, Turgenef never
sets you a weeping, but the sadness he feels
he sends from his pages, circulating through
your blood, and while the eye will not indeed
drop a tear, for such grief is likewise mostly
on the surface, the breast will heave a sigh.
And Tolstoy never fires you to go forth and
do a particularly good deed; he never, like
Schiller, sends you off to embrace your
friend, but on laying down his book you
feel a general discontent with yourself, and
a longing for a nobler life than yours is
takes possession of the soul.
15. This is the result of the all-absorbing,
all-devouring native intensity of the Russian
spirit.
16. And this intensity accounts for the suddenness
with which the Russian spirit has
blazed forth on the horizon, so that the successive
 stages of development are scarcely visible.
The darkness which overcast the letters of
Russia before Pushkin disappears not slowly,
but the sky is lighted up suddenly by innumerable
lights. Stars of the first magnitude
stud it, now here, now there, until the bewildered
observer beholds not twinkling points
but shining luminaries. In scarcely half a
century Russia has brought forth Pushkin,
Lermontof, Gogol, Dostoyefsky, Turgenef,
Tolstoy; and as the institutions of Western
Europe became russified by the mere wave
of an imperial hand, so Russian literature
became modernized as if by the wave of a
magic wand.
17. This national characteristic of intensity
gives Russian literature a hot-house aspect.
Its atmosphere is not only fragrant, but oppressively
fragrant; and as in America after
the civil war generals and colonels were almost
too numerous for social comfort, so in
Russia great authors are in well-nigh painful
abundance, and the student is embarrassed
not with the difficulty of selecting from the
midst of poverty, but with the difficulty of
 selecting from the midst of riches. And not
only is its aspect that of a hot-house, but its
very character has been affected. Such is
the intensity of the national spirit of Russia,
that it can do well but one thing at a time,
and all its strength can go into only one literary
form at a time. From 1800 to 1835
Russian literature is like a field on a midsummer
evening, full of all manner of musical
sound, and whatever hath articulate voice
does nothing but sing. Batushkof sings, Pushkin
sings, Lermontof sings, Koltsof sings, Turgenef
versifies, and Zhukofsky, like our own
poetasters, balances himself acrobatically
in metrical stanzas; and where the gift of
song is wanting, it shrieks and screeches, but
always, observe, in well-balanced rhymes.
Then comes the era of the thick periodicals,
and whatever is gifted in Russia, for a time
speaks only through them; lastly comes realism
with an intensity unparalleled elsewhere,
and everybody writes in prose, and only one
kind of prose at that,—fiction. Not a drama,
not a history, not an essay, not a philosophical
treatise has yet grown on Russian soil; all
 the energy of Russia has gone into fiction,
and Russia is not the country to produce,
when it does produce masters, only one at
a time.