22. Of which passage the principal vice is
that it does not describe to you the wind, the
thing Dickens really saw, but only what Dickens
thought he saw. He gives you not the
original but a translation, and a translation,
as you will presently see, far from faithful;
he gives you not the scene, but the effect
of the scene on his mind; and as Dickens
started out to produce not a faithful picture,
but a startling emotion, his scene is accordingly
gaudy, theatrical, false. For observe,
the wind is a respectable wind, and yet afflicted
with pettiness of tyranny, and it wreaks
vengeance; and this vengeance-wreaking wind
does not come up flying, as you would expect
of a wind, but it happens to come up leisurely,
evidently taking an after-dinner stroll,
as is becoming a respectable wind, which
finds it not inconsistent with respectability
to be vengeance-wreaking. And this respectable
wind, without any motive, suddenly
transforms himself into a malicious wind.
Observe, he is no longer revengeful, for revenge
implies something wicked done to the
wind, which rouses him, while malice has no
 such excuse, for malice acts without cause,
except from native depravity, while revenge
acts always with cause. And this upright,
leisurely strolling wind, now vengeance-wreaking,
now malicious, again without sufficient
cause changes his erect posture and kneels
down, bends his head under the timbers, and
the wind becomes a—peeper!
23. A conception like this may be very
fine, it may be very poetic, and even very
dramatic, but it is not true, for Dickens
never saw the wind thus, else his metaphors
would have been less mixed. What we see
truly with our imagination we see clearly, and
the metaphors born of clear sight are ever
pure. Hence such description is extravagant
because untrue; hence such description is demoralizing
because extravagant, immoderate.
And now read Tolstoy's description of a
storm during a coach-ride:—
“It was still ten versts to the nearest station;
but the great, dark, purple cloud which had collected,
God knows whence, without the smallest
breeze, was moving swiftly upon us. The sun,
which is not yet hidden by the clouds, brightly illumines
 its dark form, and the gray streaks which
extend from it to the very horizon. From time
to time, the lightning flashes in the distance; and
a faint, dull roar is audible, which gradually increases
in volume, approaches, and changes into
broken peals which embrace the whole heavens.
Vasili stands upon the box, and raises the cover
of the britchka. The coachmen put on their
armyaks, and, at every clap of thunder, remove
their hats and cross themselves. The horses
prick up their ears, puff out their nostrils as if
smelling the fresh air which is wafted from the
approaching thunder-cloud, and the britchka
rolls faster along the dusty road. I feel oppressed,
and am conscious that the blood
courses more rapidly through my veins. But
the advance guard of the clouds already begins
to conceal the sun; now it has peeped forth for
the last time, has illumined the terribly dark
portion of the horizon, and vanished. The entire
landscape suddenly undergoes a change, and
assumes a gloomy character. The ash woods
quiver; the leaves take on a kind of dull whitish
hue, and stand out against the purple background
of cloud, and rustle and flutter; the
crowns of the great birches begin to rock, and
tufts of dry grass fly across the road. The
water and white-breasted swallows circle about
the britchka, and fly beneath the horses, as
though with the intention of stopping us; daws
 with ruffled wings fly sideways to the wind: the
edges of the leather apron, which we have buttoned
up, begin to rise, and admit bursts of
moist wind, and flap and beat against the body
of the carriage. The lightning seems to flash
in the britchka itself, dazzles the vision, and for
a moment lights up the gray cloth, the border
gimp, and Volodya's figure cowering in a corner.
At the same moment, directly above our heads,
a majestic roar resounds, which seems to rise
ever higher and higher, and to spread ever wider
and wider, in a vast spiral, gradually gaining
force, until it passes into a deafening crash,
which causes one to tremble and hold one's
breath involuntarily. The wrath of God! how
much poetry there is in this conception of the
common people!
“The wheels whirl faster and faster. From
the backs of Vasili and Philip, who is flourishing
his reins, I perceive that they are afraid.
The britchka rolls swiftly down the hill, and
thunders over the bridge of planks. I am
afraid to move, and momentarily await our
universal destruction.