17. I consider this double-faced presentation,
this combination of the subjective method
with the objective, as the highest in art, because
it is the most comprehensive. Not that
Tolstoy is incapable of employing the objective
method alone with the highest success;
when he does employ it he is here second to
none, not even to Turgenef. Witness for
example the following description of the arrival
of a railway-train; still, the essence of
Tolstoy's art is the universality with which
 he grasps whatever comes under his creative
impulse.
18. Vronsky, engaged in a conversation,
suddenly breaks off. “However,” says he,
“here is already the train.”
“In truth, in the distance was already whistling
the engine. In a few minutes the platform
began to tremble, and puffing with steam driven
downward by the frost, in rolled the engine with
the connecting-rod of its centre wheel slowly
and rhythmically bending in and stretching out,
and with its bowing, well-muffled, frost-covered
engineer. Behind the tender, ever more slowly,
and shaking the platform still more, the express
car came with its baggage and a howling dog.
Lastly, slightly trembling before coming to a
full stop, came up the passenger coaches.
“A smartish, brisk conductor, whistling, before
the train came to a full stop jumped off;
and following him began to descend one by one
the impatient passengers,—an officer of the
guard with military bearing and frigid gaze, a
smiling, lively small tradesman with a bag in
his hand, and a peasant with a sack over his
shoulder.”
19. And from the same union of the mighty
preacher with the mighty artist springs the
second great characteristic of Tolstoy's art,
 that which in contrast to Turgenef's architectural
manner I must call Tolstoy's panoramic
manner. I have spoken in the last
lecture of Turgenef as the great architect in
the art of fiction. Tolstoy is the great panorama
painter of fiction. Of architectural regularity
there is little to be found in him, but
not because he lacks the line sense of proportion
of Turgenef, and the sense of beauty
of form, but because his art is of a nature in
which regularity of progress and rigid outline
of form are not required.