24. And for modesty, too, the literatures of
England and Russia furnish instructive comparisons.
 Russia has no autobiographies of
note. Men there were too busy with their art
to have much time left to think of themselves.
Turgenef writes Reminiscences, but only of
others, and not of himself; and when he
speaks of his own past, it is only incidentally,
and with the delicacy of a maiden. Tolstoy
gives, indeed, an autobiography as sincere as
Rousseau's and as earnest as Mill's, but only
because he believes that an account of the
spiritual struggles he went through would be
helpful to other strugglers with the terrible
problems of life. But of their personal history
there is seldom more than a trace found.
Compare with this the autobiographies of Gibbon,
Leigh Hunt, Mill, or even the Reminiscences
of Carlyle, and the widely-branching
outpourings of Ruskin in his autobiographical
sketches. Not that the English over-estimate
their own worth and importance, but the
Russians seem to have the instinctive sense
of measure in personal matters.
25. Much of this purity of taste is due to
a singular circumstance in its literary history.
Unlike other countries, in Russia, for a long
 time, literature has been the favorite solely
of the educated and wealthy classes. Almost
all the great names of Russian literature, Pushkin,
Lermontof, Hertzen, Turgenef, Zhukofsky,
Griboyedof, Karamzin, Tolstoy, were aristocrats,
if not always by birth, at least by surroundings.
The men of letters sprung from
the people, nourished by the people, living
among the people, the Burnses, the Bérangers,
the Heines are unknown in Russia. I have
already stated that originality must not be
looked for on Russian soil; that Russian
literature is essentially an imitative literature
in its forms, hence imitative force must have
time to look about, examine, copy, and for
this leisure, wealth is necessary.
26. This absence of originality has thus
proved a source of blessing to Russian literature
which well-nigh makes up the loss. For
literature thus being in the hands of men of
leisure, free from the struggle for bread, was
never governed in Russia by the law of supply
and demand, and the dollar never became,
as with us, the potent, even though the temporary
arbiter of its destinies. Hence the singular
 purity of Russian literature in point of style.
Dickens needs the dollars, and he therefore
spins out his satires to a length of distance to
be traversed only by seven-league boots, and
in verbosity is equalled only by Thackeray.
Gogol, however, not only compresses his
chapters, but even burns the whole second
part of his masterpiece, “Dead Souls,” as
unworthy of his best art. George Eliot, writing
for a standard which requires three volumes
for each novel, must fill her story with
all manner of description which does not describe,
and reflection which does not reflect;
but Turgenef files and files until he is reproached
more for omitting too much than
for adding too much. And America's greatest
living writer (I say greatest, because he
is purest in spirit, gentlest in heart, and freest
in mind) can still go on from year to year
producing one novel annually with the regularity
of a baker's muffin at breakfast. Compare
with this his own master, Tolstoy, who
for months forsakes his masterpiece, “Anna
Karenina,” because of a fastidious taste!
Hence the question why Mrs. Astor never
 invites to her table literary men, which agitated
them recently, could not have even been
asked in Russia. Such a question is only
possible in a country where the first question
a publisher puts of a book is not whether
it is good, but whether it is likely to pay.
27. Faithfulness of labor and finish of form
are therefore characteristic of whatever has
any reputation in Russia; and as works of art,
there are few works of the Russian masters
that are not veritable masterpieces. I say
this with confidence of Turgenef, Tolstoy,
Gogol, and Pushkin; but I think this remark
would hold even of the lesser lights of Russian
literature. A sincerity, a truthfulness, a
realness, is thus found in Russian literature,
which makes it be a thing of beauty instead
of doing some deeds of beauty. On reading
“Uncle Tom's Cabin,” you involuntarily ask,
“What effect has this book had on slavery
in America?” On reading Turgenef's Memoirs
of a Sportsman, though it accomplished
as much for the serf, you no longer ask, “What
has the book done for the serf?” You do
not think of the serf any more now that he
 has ceased to be. But you do think of the
innumerable things of beauty that roll out
from his pages before you as if from a kaleidoscope.
And if to be is greater than to
do, then Russian literature is truly original,
even though its forms be borrowed; since
instead of seeming it is, and whatever truly is,
is original.
28. From this sincerity of Russian writers
comes the third great virtue of Russian literature,
a virtue possessed as yet by other
literatures in but a small degree. The Russian
writer is first of all in earnest, and he
has no time to give to mere entertainment,
mere amusement. The Goldsmiths with their
Bees and their Citizens of the World, the Addisons
with their Spectators, nobly writ though
these be, yet written mostly with no higher
purpose than to make the breakfast-roll glide
down the throat more softly,—these exist not
in Russia. Things of beauty, things of entertainment,
like Addison's Essays, are indeed
found in Russia; but not for entertainment
alone were these writ, hence not in the
strain of mirth. Rather are they writ with
 the blood of the heart; for to the Russian,
“Life is real, life is earnest,” not a mere pastime,
and it was given to a Russian painter
to make the all-known but singularly-forgotten
observation that Christ never—laughed!