10. When after two years Turgenef returned
to his native land, he brought back
with him, indeed, a high knowledge of Latin
grammar, but a total ignorance of the highest
aims of life. He brought back with him a
religious scepticism, and a metaphysical pessimism,
which colored henceforth his whole
life, and therefore his artistic works. For
those were the days when men yet believed
that the great problems of the soul in its relation
to the gods and to men could be solved
not so much by living and by doing, as by
disputing and by talking; those were the
days when the philosopher's stone, turning all
things into gold, was sought not in a rule for
the conduct of life, such as “Love thy neighbor,”
or “Do unto others,” but rather in the
barren, egg-dancing, acrobatically-balanced
 formula, “What is, is right.” Those were
the days when Hegel was supreme in philosophy
because of his obscurity, as Browning
is now supreme in poetry because of his;
the shrivelled, evaporated, dead grain of
wheat was prized all the more because it
had been searched out with painful toil from
the heap of chaff. “By their fruits ye shall
know them.” The fruit of the deep study of
Browning is an intimate knowledge of the
use of English particles; and the fruit of
the devoted study of Hegel was an intimate
knowledge of metaphysical verbiage: being,
substance, essence, and absolute. But of life-giving
nourishment there was none to be had.
The barrenness of all this, Turgenef indeed
soon did perceive, but when the disenchantment
came, his blood was already poisoned;
his very being was eaten into by doubt, and
almost to the very end of his days Turgenef
remained a fatalistic sceptic, a godless pessimist;
not till his old age did he espy the
promised land. It was only when he witnessed
with his own eyes the boundless self-sacrifice
of the revolutionists, when the old
 man was moved by the heroism of the young
Sophie Bardine even to the kissing of the
very sheet upon which the girl's burning
words to her judges were printed,—then,
indeed, he regained his faith. He now hoped
for his country, and stood even ready to become
the head of the revolutionary movement
in Russia; but for his artistic career
all this came too late. In fact, his faith in
God he never regained, though his hope for
man did come back at last in his old age
with the glow of his younger days.
11. This fundamental philosophic scepticism
which had poisoned Turgenef's mind
throughout the best years of his life accounts
for a striking change which in time took place
in the method of his art. Hitherto his art had
been photographic of individuals. His “Memoirs
of a Sportsman” is a gallery, not of
ideals, not of types, but of actual men,—a gallery
put on exhibition for the same end for
which the rogues' gallery is exposed at the
police headquarters. It is a means towards
the welfare of the country. But after that
book, when the scepticism had become part
 of his being, his method changes. For he
now becomes convinced that the misrule of
Russia is not so much due to the government
as to the people themselves; that existence
is in itself evil; that salvation, therefore, if it
can come at all, must come not from without,
but from within; that reform, therefore, was
needed not so much for the institution, as for
the men themselves. And to him men are
diseased. He no longer therefore paints individual
men, but henceforth he paints types;
just as the physician first studies the disease
not as affecting this patient or that, but as
likely to affect all men, every man.
12. For much of this scepticism before life
and irreverence before God Turgenef had to
thank the paternal government of his fatherland.
There are indeed those to whom sorrow
comes like a messenger from the skies
above, and lifts them heavenward on its wings.
Turgenef alas! was not one of these. His
was one of those souls whom sorrow deprives
not only of the joys of the present, but also
of the hopes of the future; and the government
saw to it that of sorrows poor Turgenef
 have enough. Homelessness is an affliction
to all sons of Adam, but to none is the
sorrow of exile so intense as to the Russian.
And to exile Turgenef was soon driven.
Hid under glowing pictures of nature and
fascinating figures of men, the real meaning
of the “Memoirs of a Sportsman,” while
they appeared in detached sketches, eluded
readily enough the Argus-eyed censor. But
when these sketches were gathered into a living
book, then whatever had eye could behold,
and whatever had ear could hear, their heavenly
message. The book therefore creates
a sensation, the censor is astir, hurried consultation
takes place, his Majesty himself
is roused; but all this too late; the living
book can no longer be strangled. The government
saw that the monster was hydra-headed,
and resolved to let it alone rather than by
cutting one of its heads to rouse twenty in its
stead. The book then was spared, but the
writer was henceforth doomed; and the occasion
for the final blow is soon enough at
hand. The great Gogol had at last departed.
The enthusiastic Turgenef writes a letter about
 the dead master, and calls him a great man.
“In my land only he is great with whom I
speak, and only while I am speaking with
him,” had said Paul the father; and Nicolas
proved a worthy son. “In Russia there shall
be no great men,” saith the Tsar; and Turgenef
is arrested. High-stationed dame indeed
intercedes for the gifted culprit. “But remember,
madame,” she is told, “he called
Gogol a great man.” “Ah,” high-stationed
protectress replies, “I knew not that he committed
that crime!” Which crime, accordingly,
Turgenef expiates with one month's
imprisonment in the dungeon, and two years'
banishment to his estates. Only when the
heir to the throne himself appeased his enraged
sire was Turgenef allowed to go in
peace. Once master over himself again, Turgenef
hesitated no longer. He loved, indeed,
his country much, but he loved freedom more;
and like a bird fresh from the cage away flew
Turgenef beyond the sea. The migrating bird
returns, indeed, in the spring; but for Turgenef
there was no longer any spring on Russian soil,
and once abroad, he became an exile for life.
13. I have said that the heroes of his six
great novels are not photographs, but types. I
venture to say that neither Turgenef himself
nor any other Russian ever knew a Bazarof, a
Paul Kirsanof, a Rudin, a Nezhdanof. But
as in the generic image of Francis Galton the
traits of all the individuals are found whose
faces entered into the production of the image,
so in the traits of Turgenef's types
every one can recognize some one of his acquaintance.
And such is the life which the
master breathes into his creations, that they
become not only possible to the reader, but
they actually gain flesh and blood in his very
presence.
14. And of these types, Turgenef, in harmony
with the advance of his own warfare,
has furnished a progressive series. Accordingly
the earliest depicted under the impression
of profound despair is the type of the
superfluous man,—the man, who not only
does nothing, but can do nothing, struggle he
never so hard. And the superfluous man not
only is impotent, but he knows his impotence,
so that he is dead in soul as well as in body.
 This brief sketch of a living corpse, written
as early as 1850, forms thus the prologue, as
it were, to all his future tragedies. From this
depth of nothingness Turgenef, however, soon
rises to at least the semblance of strength;
and while Rudin is at bottom as impotent as
Tchulkaturin, he at least pretends to strength.
Rudin, then, is the hero of phrases, the
boaster; he promises marvels, he charms, he
captivates; but it all ends in words, and Rudin
perishes as needlessly as he lived needlessly.
In “Fathers and Sons,” however, Bazarof
is no longer a talker; he already rises to
indignation and rebellion; he lives out his
spirit, and stubbornly resists society, religion,
institutions. From Bazarof Turgenef ascends
still higher to Nezhdanof in “Virgin Soil,”
whose aggressive attitude is already unmistakable.
Nezhdanof no longer indulges in tirades
against government, but he glumly organizes
the revolutionary forces for actual battle.
Lastly, Turgenef arrives at the highest type
of the warrior, at Sophia Perofskya; and this
his last type he paints in brief epilogue, just
as his first type he had painted in brief prologue.
 What this his last type meant to Turgenef
is best seen from the short prose-poem
itself.