“But nowhere was a single human face to
be seen.… Everything seemed dead, everything
turned itself away from him, drawing itself
away from him forever, leaving him alone to
the mercy of fate. Only the factory was sending
forth its rank odor, its dull uproar, and a
cold rain began to fall in fine drops, pricking
like needles.
“Then Nezhdanof looked up, through the
twisted branches of the tree beneath which he
was standing, at the gray, heavy, wet, indifferent,
blind sky; he gaped, shrugged his shoulders,
and said to himself, ‘After all there is nothing
else I can do. I cannot return to Petersburg,
to prison.’ He threw down his cap, and with
the premature feeling of a kind of agonizing,
not wholly unpleasant yet powerful tension of
the nerves, he put the mouth of the revolver
against his breast and pulled the trigger.…
“Something gave him a sudden blow not even
a very hard one … but already he lay on his
back, trying to make out what had happened
and how it came that he had just seen Tatyana.…
He wished to call to her and say, ‘Oh,
there is something not right;’ but already he is
speechless, and over his face into his eyes, over
 his forehead into his brain, there rushes a whirlwind
of green smoke, and a flat something
oppressively heavy crushed him forever to the
ground.
“Nezhdanof was not mistaken in supposing
he saw Tatyana; just as he pulled the trigger,
she came to one of the windows of the little
wing and descried him beneath the apple-tree.
She had scarcely time to ask herself, ‘What
is he doing under the apple-tree bareheaded in
such weather as this?’ when he fell backward
like a sheaf of wheat; but she felt at once that
something tragic had happened; and she rushed
downstairs, out into the enclosure.… She ran
up to Nezhdanof.… ‘Alexis Dimitritsh, what
is the matter?’ But darkness had already come
over him. Tatyana stooped over him, and saw
blood.…
“‘Paul!’ she shouted in a strange voice,
‘Paul!’