17. And the father of the prodigal son was
only increasing pauperism when he received
the unworthy youth with open arms; he had
set a premium (in the words of our scientific
charities) upon other sons becoming likewise
prodigal.
18. And so is a sentimentalist every noble
soul that believeth in God's wisdom more
than in man's wisdom; that believeth more
in the power of trust than in the power of
fear; more in mercy than in calculation;
more in charity than in justice; more in
love than in political economy; more in
Christ than in Octavia Hill; more in the
Gospels than in Parliamentary Poor Reports.
By their fruits ye shall judge them. If the
fear of pauperism result in excusing that
vilest of sins, the withholding of help by
one brother from another, then away with scientific
charity and its talked-of diminution of
pauperism; and if the lending of a helping
 hand even to the unworthy be the result of
sentimentalism, then welcome sentimentalism,
blessed be sentimentalism!
19. The obedience to the commands of
Christ has thus furnished Tolstoy with a basis
for existence which he had hitherto sought in
vain from science and metaphysics; the obedience
to the commands of Christ has thus
furnished Tolstoy a solution of social problems
which he had hitherto sought in vain in
ethics and sociology; and lastly, obedience to
the commands of Christ has furnished Tolstoy
a solution of financial problems found
neither in political economy nor in statistics.
And the fourth articulate utterance in the
message of Tolstoy is his merciless distinction
between the money of the poor, which
they have earned by their toil, and the money
of the rich, which they have forfeited by their
idleness.
20. Tolstoy is thus the preacher, the cause
of a change in the hearts of men; but while he
is thus a cause unto others, he himself is likewise
an effect of the change which has begun
to take place in the hearts of men. The possibility
 of a Tolstoy in the nineteenth century
is the most hopeful sign of the times with regard
to the social brotherhood of men. In
theology, the feeling of the equality of men
before God has so permeated the minds of
men, that the claim of superiority which formerly
each made over the other, though still
tacitly implied, is now no longer upheld by
sober thinking folk; in politics, too, equality
of men before the law has at last become acknowledged,
if not always in practice, at least
in theory. And if monarchies and aristocracies
still do exist, it is not because all concerned
in the decision have deliberately decided
for them, but because it is safer to
endure irrational institutions that are old, than
to undertake the sudden establishment of rational
institutions that are new. Only in the
social field the feeling of the equality of men
has not yet permeated them enough to rouse
their souls against the present division of society
into industrial lords on the one hand,
and industrial slaves on the other. That
two men born on the same day, at the same
hour, in the same nakedness, one in a palace
 without his merit, the other in a hovel without
his fault, should each pass his lifetime,
the one in luxury and idleness, the other in
want and toil, is still looked upon by thinking
men, by feeling men, as something that must
be, as something that should be, since Providence
evidently meant men to be thus divided.
The idle thus go on enjoying their unearned
idleness; the toiling thus go on enduring their
unearned hardship, and all is quiet.
21. Quiet? Alas! no. Burglars, robbers,
tramps, beggars, forgers, defaulters in abundance,
jails, prisons, reform-houses, stand out
palatially amid lawns and green woods and
winding rivers. The silent darkness is occasionally
lighted up by the lurid torch of the
incendiary, and now and then we are treated
to spectacular fireworks with powder and
dynamite and bomb.