25. Who is here right, who is here wrong,—the
public with its millions, Tolstoy in his
loneliness?
26. That genius should often misunderstand
its own strength, and seek it where it
is weakest, is indeed no new phenomenon in
its history. Frederick the Great prides himself
more on his flute-playing than on his
kingship; and it is not so very long ago that
in our very midst a university professor called
the happiest day of his life not that on which
he discovered a new Greek particle, but
that on which the crew of his university won
the boat-race. And a mere chance tour on
a Sunday through our churches would quickly
show the lamentably frequent misapprehension
of genius by itself; for many a fine genius
for the actor's art is spoiled by an imaginary
call to the pulpit. The presumption therefore
is indeed against the great Tolstoy in his
dispute with the great public. Still, I venture
to side with Tolstoy. I too venture to think
that Tolstoy's greatest work is found not so
much in his works of pure art as in his works
of pure religion; and with God's blessing,
my friends, I trust you will see it with me in
the next lecture.
1. I have stated in the last lecture that Tolstoy
is the preacher, not of the new gospel of
death, but of the old gospel of life. Tolstoy
is to be revered as one of the greatest teachers
among men, not so much because he has
proved indisputably that only by love alone
can men be said truly to live, nor wholly
because he shows by logic inexorable that man
can be truly blessed only when he devotes
his life to the service of his fellow-men. His
logic may be bad, his proof may be faulty.
To be skilled in the art of lighting with words
is no more essential to a noble soul than to
be skilled in the art of fighting with lists.
Both can indeed knock down an opponent;
but knocking down is not the business of life,
 but raising up. And Tolstoy is to be revered
among teachers because he first of all raises
up; because he preaches what those who
have raised men up have for ages preached;
because he preaches what Christ has preached,
what Emerson has preached, what Carlyle has
preached, what Ruskin is still preaching, and
what will ever continue to be preached as
long as there is a God in heaven, and a human
soul on earth yearning for the possession
of that God. “Socialism, Communism!” men
bellow to Tolstoy, and think to confound him
with the hateful name. “Would you have us
give up,” they say, “the fruit of civilization
and progress, and return to the primitive life
of the days of yore?” But read Emerson's
“Miscellanies,” Carlyle's “Past and Present,”
Ruskin's “Fors Clavigera,” and see for yourselves
whether Tolstoy preaches aught different
from these. And if this be communism,
if this be socialism, then welcome communism,
welcome socialism, because ever welcome
brotherhood.
2. Tolstoy is indeed a Russian of the Russians,
but he is a man before he is a Russian;
 the greatest of Russians, he is more than a
Russian, just as Socrates, the greatest of the
Greeks, was more than a Greek; just as Christ,
the greatest of Hebrews, was more than a
Hebrew. Socrates was sent not for Greece
alone, but for us likewise; Jesus was sent not
for the Jews alone, but for us likewise; and
so Tolstoy is sent not to the Russians alone,
but to us likewise.
3. Tolstoy, then, came to deliver a message;
but the message of messages has already
been delivered well-nigh nineteen hundred
years ago. Not one word is there, indeed, to
be added to the law laid down in the Sermon
on the Mount; and were men to live out the
gospel of Christ, there would be no need
of new messengers, the kingdom of heaven
would then be veritably established, and the
Master would once more dwell with men as
he hath foretold. But Christianity, alas! has
been on trial for well-nigh nineteen hundred
years, while the religion of Christ still remains
to be tried. There is therefore ever
need of new apostles to preach the kingdom
of heaven, the gospel of Christ; and it is
 Tolstoy's distinction that he came to preach
not the new gospel of the nineteenth century,
but the old gospel of the first century. For
God sees to it that the way to blessedness
for men be ever open; that the kingdom of
heaven be ever within their reach, if they
but choose to enter it, if they but choose
not to give themselves over to the Powers
of Darkness.