When delivering the Sixth Lecture,
I read extracts from Tolstoy's “My Religion”
and “What to Do,” illustrating
 every position of his I there commend;
but for reasons it is needless to state,
I omit them in the book. I can only
hope that the reader will all the more
readily go to the books themselves.
I. P.
Grafton, Mass.,
1 July, 1889.
1. I have chosen the four writers mentioned
on the programme not so much because
they are the four greatest names of
Russian literature as because they best represent
the point of view from which these lectures
are to be delivered. For what Nature
is to God, that is Literature unto the Soul.
God ever strives to reveal himself in Nature
through its manifold changes and developing
forms. And the human soul ever strives to
reveal itself in literature through its manifold
changes and developing forms. But while
to see the goal of the never resting creativeness
of God is not yet given unto man, it is
given unto mortal eyes to behold the promised
land from Pisgah, toward which the soul
 ever strives, and which, let us hope, it ever
is approaching. For the soul ever strives
onward and upward, and whether the struggle
be called progress of species, looking for
the ideal, or union with God, the thing is
the same. It is of this journey of the soul
heavenward that literature is the record, and
the various chases of literary development in
every nation are only so many mile-posts on
the road.
2. In its childhood the human soul only
exists; it can hardly yet be said to live; but
soon it becomes conscious of its existence,
and the first cry it utters is that of joy.
Youth is ever cheerful, and in its cheer it
sings. Youth sings to the stars in the sky,
to the pale moon and to the red moon, to
the maiden's cheeks and to the maiden's
fan; youth sings to the flower, to the bee,
to the bird, and even to the mouse. And
what is true of the individual is equally true
of the race. The earliest voices in the literature
of any nation are those of song. In
Greece Homer, like his favorite cicada,
chirps right gladly, and in England Chaucer
 and Shakespeare are first of all bards. In
France and Germany it is even difficult to
find the separate prominent singers, for there
the whole nation, whatever hath articulate
voice in it, takes to singing with its troubadours
and minnesingers. In its earliest
stages then the soul sings, not in plaintive
regretful strain, but birdlike from an overflowing
breast, with rejoicings and with
mirth.