6. In endeavoring therefore to present Pushkin
to you, I shall present to you not the
nine tenths of his works which were written
only by his hands,—his dramas, his tales, his
romances, whether in prose or verse,—but
the one tithe of his works which was writ from
his heart. For Pushkin was essentially a lyric
 singer, and whatever comes from this side of
his being is truly original; all else, engrafted
upon him as it is from without, either from
ambition or from imitation, cannot be called
his writing, that which he alone and none
others had to deliver himself of. What
message Pushkin had to deliver at all to
his fellow-men is therefore found in his
lyrics.
7. Before proceeding, however, to look at
this singer Pushkin, it is necessary to establish
a standard by which his attainment is to be
judged. And that we may ascertain how
closely Pushkin approaches the highest, I
venture to read to you the following poem,
as the highest flight which the human soul
is capable of taking heavenward on the wings
of song.
8. I consider a poem of this kind (and I
regret that there are very few such in any language)
to stand at the very summit of poetic
aspiration. For not only is it perfect in form,
and is thus a thing of beauty made by the
hands of man, but its subject is of the very
highest, since it is a hymn, a praise of God,
even though the name of the Most High be
not there. For what is heaven? Heaven is
 a state where the fellowship of man with man
is such as to leave no room for want to the
one while there is abundance to the other.
Heaven is a state where the wants of the individual
are so cared for that he needs the help
of none. But if there be no longer any need
of toiling, neither for neighbor nor for self,
what is there left for the soul to do but to
praise God and glorify creation? A hymn
like the above, then, is the outflow of a spirit
which hath a heavenly peace. And this is
precisely the occupation with which the imagination
endows the angels; the highest
flight of the soul is therefore that in which
it is so divested of the interests of the earth
as to be filled only with reverence and worship.
And this hymn to Force seems to me
to have come from a spirit which, at the time
of its writing at least, attained such freedom
from the earthly.
9. Such a poem being then at one end of
the scale, the highest because it gratifies the
soul's highest need, on the opposite end, on
the lowest, is found that which gratifies the
soul's lowest need, its need for novelty, its
 curiosity. And this is done by purely narrative
writing, of which the following is a
good example:—
10. The purpose of the author here was
only to tell a story; and as success is to be
measured by the ability of a writer to adapt
his means to his ends, it must be acknowledged
that Pushkin is here eminently successful.
For the story is here well told;
 well told because simply told; the narrative
moves, uninterrupted by excursions into side-fields.
In its class therefore this poem must
stand high, but it is of the lowest class.