11. For well told though this story be, it is
after all only a story, with no higher purpose
than merely to gratify curiosity, than merely
to amuse. Its art has no higher purpose than
to copy faithfully the event, than to be a
faithful photograph; and moreover it is the
story not of an emotion, but of a passion, and
an ignoble passion at that; the passion is
jealousy,—in itself an ugly thing, and the
fruit of this ugly thing is a still uglier thing,—a
murder. The subject therefore is not a
thing of beauty, and methinks that the sole
business of art is first of all to deal with
things of beauty. Mediocrity, meanness,
ugliness, are fit subjects for art only when
they can be made to serve a higher purpose,
just as the sole reason for tasting
wormwood is the improvement of health.
But this higher purpose is here wanting.
Hence I place such a poem on the lowest
plane of art.
12. This also is a narrative poem; but it
tells something more than a story. A new
element is here added. For it not only gratifies
our curiosity about the mother and the
babe, but it also moves us. And it moves not
 our low passion, but it stirs our high emotion.
Not our anger is here roused, as against the
owner of the black shawl, but our pity is
stirred for the innocent babe; and even the
mother, though guilty enough, stirs our hearts.
Here, too, as in the “Black Shawl,” the art of
the narrator is perfect. The few touches of
description are given only in so far as they
vivify the scene and furnish a fit background
for the mother and child. But the theme is
already of a higher order, and in rank I therefore
place the “Outcast” one plane above
the “Black Shawl.”
13. The two poems I have just read you
are essentially ballads; they deal indeed with
emotion, but only incidentally. Their chief
purpose is the telling of the story. I shall
now read you some specimens of a higher
order of poetry,—of that which reflects the
pure emotion which the soul feels when beholding
beauty in Nature. I consider such
poetry as on a higher plane, because this emotion
is at bottom a reverence before the powers
of Nature, hence a worship of God. It
is at bottom a confession of the soul of its
 humility before its Creator. It is the constant
presence of this emotion which gives permanent
value to the otherwise tame and commonplace
writings of Wordsworth. Wordsworth
seldom climbs the height he attains in
those nine lines, the first of which are:—
But here Pushkin is always on the heights.
And the first I will read you shall be one
in which the mere sense of Nature's beauty
finds vent in expression without any conscious
ethical purpose. It is an address to
the last cloud.
14. Observe, here the poet has no ultimate
end but that of giving expression to the overflowing
sense of beauty which comes over the
soul as he beholds the last remnant of a thunder-storm
floating off into airy nothingness.
But it is a beauty which ever since the days
of Noah and his rainbow has filled the human
soul with marvelling and fearing adoration.
Beautiful, then, in a most noble sense
this poem indeed is. Still, I cannot but consider
the following few lines to the Birdlet,
belonging as the poem does to the same class
with “The Cloud,” as still superior.