“On the whole, we make too much of faults.
Faults? The greatest of faults, I should say, is
to be conscious of none. Readers of the Bible,
above all, one would think, might know better.
 Who is called there ‘the man according to God's
own heart’? David, the Hebrew king, had
fallen into sins enough; blackest crimes; there
was no want of sins. And therefore the unbelievers
sneer, and ask, ‘Is this the man according
to God's own heart?’ The sneer, I must
say, seems to be but a shallow one.
“What are faults, what are the outward details
of a life, if the inner secret of it, the remorse,
temptations, true, often-battled, never-ending
struggle of it be forgotten? ‘It is not in
man that walketh to direct his steps.’ Of all
acts, is not, for a man, repentance the most divine?
The deadliest sin, I say, were the same
supercilious consciousness of no sin; that is
death; the heart so conscious is divorced from
sincerity, humility, and fact,—is dead; it is
‘pure,’ as dead dry sand is pure.
“David's life and history, as written for us in
those Psalms of his, I consider to be the truest
emblem ever given of man's moral progress and
warfare here below. All earnest men will ever
discern in it the faithful struggle of an earnest
human soul toward what is good and best.
Struggle often baffled, sore battled, down as into
entire wreck; yet a struggle never ended; ever
with tears, repentance, true unconquerable purpose
begun anew. Poor human nature! Is not
a man's walking, in truth, always that,—‘a
succession of falls’? Man can do no other.
In this wild element of Life, he has to struggle
onward; now fallen, deep abased; and ever
with tears, repentance, with bleeding heart, he
has to rise again, struggle again still onward.
That his struggle be a faithful, unconquerable
one; that is the question of questions. We will
put up with many sad details, if the soul of it
were true. Details by themselves will never
teach us what it is.”
10. Powerful as this passage is, I cannot
help feeling that Tolstoy has treated the same
subject more artistically than Carlyle, by embodying
his lesson in objective shape, where
Carlyle treats it subjectively. And now listen
to Tolstoy:—
THE REPENTING SINNER.