“She said to herself, ‘No, I cannot think this
out now; later, when I shall be more calm.’
But this calmness for her thoughts never came;
whenever the thought came to her of what she
had done, and of what was to become of her, and
of what she must do, terror came upon her, and
she drove away these thoughts.
“‘Later, later,’ she repeated, ‘when I am
more calm.’
“But in sleep, when she had no control over
her thoughts, her situation appeared to her in
all its ugly nakedness. One dream came to her
almost nightly. She dreamed that both were
her husbands, that both were spending upon her
their caresses. Alexei Alexandrovitsh cried as
he kissed her hands, and said, ‘Ah, how good
this is!’ And Alexei Vronsky was there, and
 he also was her husband. And she wondered
why all this had hitherto seemed to her impossible,
and explained to them laughingly how
simple all this was, and that now they were both
content and happy. But the dream oppressed
her like an Alp, and she awoke every time in
terror.”
15. And of such unapproachable art the
examples in Tolstoy are well-nigh innumerable.
There is hardly a single work of Tolstoy
in which he does not display that
marvellous fidelity which has made Mr.
Howells exclaim: “This is not a picture of
life, but life itself!” And this fidelity Tolstoy
attains not so much by depicting the
event itself as by depicting its effect on the
soul; just as the silent sight of the wounded
on the field tells of the battle more loudly
than the thunder of the cannon. I say this is
the highest art, because its method is universal,
where all others are only particular; for
men may indeed differ in the language of the
tongue, but they do not differ in the language
of the spirit.
16. Read in the same light, then, his unparalleled
 gallery of life-scenes in “Childhood,
Boyhood, and Youth.” Read in the same
light the death-scene of Count Bezukhoi in
“War and Peace;” read the war-scene on
the bridge, the wounding of Balkonsky; read
the skating-scene in “Anna Karenina,” the
racing-scene, the meeting between Anna and
her darling Seriozha. My friends, in the
presence of such art words fail me; I can
only cry to you, “Read, read, and read!”
Read humbly, read admiringly. The reading
of Tolstoy in this spirit shall in itself be
unto you an education of your highest artistic
sense. And when your souls have become
able to be thrilled to their very depths by
the unspeakable beauty of Tolstoy's art, you
will then learn to be ashamed of thought that
for years you sensible folk of Boston have
been capable of allowing,—the Stevensons
with their Hydes, and the Haggards with
their Shes, and even the clumsy Wards with
their ponderous Elsmeres, to steal away under
the flag of literature your thoughtful moments.
You will then learn to understand
how it comes to pass that the artistically cold
 passionless Mr. Howells even, the apostle of
heartlessness in art,—however brave and full
of heart the noble man be in actual life,—can
be struck with awe before the mighty
presence of Tolstoy, and how it is possible
that the only words he can whisper is, “I
cannot say aught!” The preface of Mr.
Howells to Tolstoy's “Sebastopol” has been
declared by wiseacres to be the symptom of
his decadence. My friends, believe it not.
This admiration of Mr. Howells for Tolstoy
is verily not the symptom that he is beginning
to fall, but rather that he is just beginning
to rise.