29. But while the native endowment of
the soul, its spiritual capital, is the chief guide
of the fate of literature, other forces also affect
its course, the chief among which is the
political government of the people. In most
countries the influence of government upon
literature has been slight. Shakespeare's plays,
Milton's Paradise, were not affected by the
political struggles of England. The sole
writing of Milton which was affected by English
politics, his prose, belongs to literature
only in so far as it throws light on the author
of Paradise Lost. Dante's Divine Comedy,
charged though it be with the political electricity
of his times, was but little affected by
the state of government. In other countries
the government of the people was as much
itself an effect of the native endowment of
the soul as its literature; and government and
literature flowed therefore side by side, in two
 parallel streams, seldom interfering with each
other's course. In Russia, however, government
has extended a powerful influence on
literature, and the most marked effect of its
influence is the short-livedness of most Russian
authors. The calm, peaceful existence
of the literary man has already been sung by
Carlyle as a life-lengthener. In Russia, however,
the same fatality which has pursued its
political rulers has also pursued its spiritual
rulers; and as most conquerors have died an
unnatural death, so most writers have died an
unnatural death, or only after an unnatural life.
The witticism of Mark Twain, that the bed
must be a most fatal place, since most people
die in bed, is not applicable to Russian
emperors and Russian writers. Few of them
can be said to have died in their beds. Griboyedof
is assassinated; Pushkin and Lermontof
are murdered; Gogol is found dead from
bodily starvation, and Byelinsky is found dead
from spiritual starvation; Batushkof dies insane;
Dostoyefsky and Chernishefsky are in
prison the best years of their lives; Turgenef
can find the length of his days only in exile,
 and Tolstoy the length of his in ploughing
fields. For such a strange disharmony in the
lives of Russian men of letters, the government
is largely responsible. An autocracy
which feels itself called to wrap literature
tightly in swaddling-clothes, and establishes a
censorship which does not shrink even from
making verbal changes in the works of the artist
to improve his style, can accomplish little
more than the shortening of literary lives.
For literature is a flower which can only wither
at the touch of unhallowed hands, and the
rude hands of the censor are far from being
hallowed.
30. Hence Russian literature not only is
a mere fragment, a mere brick of the vast
edifice which it is capable of becoming; it
is even bound to remain a mere fragment for
a long time to come. For as Socrates lived
in Plato, Plato in Aristotle, and Aristotle in
the Schoolmen, as Lessing lived in Goethe,
Goethe in Heine, and Heine in young Germany,
so great literary fathers reappear in the
progeny of the next generation; the reproduction
is indeed oft puny enough, still the
 reproduction is there. But in Russia, while
Pushkin lived in Gogol, and Gogol in Turgenef,
the generation which was to inherit
the kingdom left by Turgenef and Tolstoy is
now buried in fortresses and dungeons. And
as in America mammon has so eaten away
literary aspiration as to leave Emerson and
Hawthorne, Prescott and Motley, intellectually
childless, so in Russia, autocracy has so
eaten away the literary material as to leave
the great masters childless.
31. Fortunately, though deprived by despotism
of all power of propagation on Russian
soil, the noble spirit of Russian literature has
by a force I cannot but call divine been allowed
to be propagated on foreign soil; and if the
literature of the west, which is now stagnating
in the pools of doubt, irreverence, mammon,
and cold intellectualism, misnamed culture,
is to be purified, the purification must come
from the breath of Life which blows from Russia.
This is the true meaning of the present
craze for Russian authors. There is a force
in them which the mass instinctively recognizes
as divine; it feels for it, gropes for it,
 and the Devil, as usual, is the first to seize for
his purposes whatever noble impulse comes
over men, and this search for the divine of the
mass becomes a sham, a fashionable craze.
Hence the rage, the boom. This is the inevitable
stage of falsehood through which every
noble aspiration must pass. By and by the
stage of truth must come, and come it shall,
in due time. Russian authors will then be
read not because it is the fashion and the
craze, but because they have a message from
the very heavens to deliver unto him that hath
eyes to see and ears to hear: the message of
sincerity, the message of earnestness, the message
of love. Then will have been reached
the stage of truth.
32. Out of this crampedness of Russian
literature by government developed that virtue
of its masters, which with their sincerity
and simplicity, or moderation, forms a most
beautiful trinity of graces; I mean their freedom.
You will indeed hear full many a yard-stick
critic as he goes about with his load of
pigeon-holed boxes to take measure of each
author, and label him, and duly relegate him
 to convenient pigeon-hole,—such critic you
will hear discourse much about classicism,
and romanticism, and realism, and of their
prevalence at different times in Russian literature.
Believe it not! The Russian author
who is at all worth classifying is slave of no
school; he is free, for he is a worshipper of the
truth which alone maketh men free, he is a
school unto himself. Is Gogol a realist? He
gives you indeed the reality, but he breathes
into it a beauty only visible to idealizing eyes.
Is Turgenef a realist? When thrilled with the
unspeakable beauty of the sky, he depicts it
so as to realize for you the ideal. And when
Tolstoy is thrilled with a moral emotion, he
depicts it so as to idealize the real for you.
The Russians thus refuse to be classified.
And they belong to only one class,—the
class of those that cannot be classified.
33. Thus has it come to pass that the west,
to which Russian literature owes its nourishment,
is now in its old age to be nourished
by its foster child. The child is to become
the father of the man; and Russian literature
is henceforth to be the source of the regeneration
 of the western spirit. As the future
fighters for freedom will have to look to the
Perofskayas, to the Bardines, and the Zassulitshes,
and to the unnamed countless victims
of the Siberian snow-fields for models of heroism,
so methinks henceforth writers must look
to the Russians for models in their art: to
Gogol for pure humor, to Turgenef for the
worship of natural beauty, to Tolstoy for the
worship of moral beauty.