4. For, O my friends, I cannot emphasize
 it too strongly that our gifts—whether they
consist in wealth, or in the ability to sing,
to paint, to build, or to count—are not given
unto us to be used for our pleasure merely,
or as means of our advancement, whether
social or intellectual. But they are given
unto us that we may use them for helping
those who need help. Talk not therefore of
art for its own sake; that art needs no purpose,
but is an end unto itself. Such talk is only a
convenient way of evading the Heaven-imposed
responsibility of using for others those
gifts with which a merciful power hath endowed
their undeserving possessors. Art,
therefore, to be truly worthy, must have a
purpose, and, execution being equal, that art is
highest, which hath the highest purpose; that
art lowest, which hath the lowest purpose.
5. But it was not given to Gogol to announce
the loftiest message, the message of
peace, of love, of submission, the message of
Tolstoy; the times of Gogol were not ripe
for this; the times of Gogol called for indignation,
for protest, and Gogol is the indignant
protester.
6. Hitherto, whatever force has been exerted
towards protesting against the misrule
of Russia by autocracy has come from the
South. Stenka Rasin, Pugatchef, came not
from the North but from the South. And
the most formidable division of the Decembrist
conspirators of 1825 was that of Pestel
and Muraviof, with their headquarters in the
South. And even the policy of terrorizing
the autocracy by assassination, which was
adopted in our own day by the most formidable
opponents of the government, by the
revolutionists miscalled Nihilists, also originated
in the South,—with Ossinsky and his
comrades in Kief. Gogol, the protester in
literature, was likewise a Southerner. And
it will be worth while to cast a glance at this
country and see what therein is to make it
thus a hot-bed of protest.
7. Beyond the waterfalls of the Dnieper
there extends a to the eye boundless land of
prairie which for ages has been the rendezvous
of all manner of wild, lawless, but sturdy
folk. Of this land Gogol himself has given
a description glowingly beautiful as only the
 love of a Little Russian for the Steppe could
give. Taras Bulba had just started out
with his two sons to join the camp of the
Cossaks.
“Meanwhile the steppe had already received
them all into its green embrace, and the high
grass surrounding them hid them, and the black
Cossaks' caps alone now gleamed between its
stalks.