29. I cannot therefore ask you to take
leave with me of Turgenef without at least
urging you to profit by this one fact in his
life. Turgenef failed to reach the highest, the
height of Tolstoy, because he failed to free
himself from that alone which must forever
trammel the soul. He failed to free himself
from that fundamental distrust of God which
is at bottom of all despair. You, too, my
friends, have that distrust. O ye in society
who dread the consequences of having one
kind word to say, or even one glance of recognition
to cast at a brother because forsooth
he has not been properly introduced to
you, are not ye doubting your own God in
your breasts, which acts not in fear of your
fellow-men, but in trust of them? And, O ye
who refuse to help a begging brother for fear
 lest he prove an impostor, are not ye likewise
at bottom doubting the God within you which
acts through pity to a brother, even though
he do deceive? Turgenef fell short of the
highest because he did not cast off the scepticism
of his intellect. Are not ye, my friends,
likewise in danger of falling short of the highest
because you too do not cast off the scepticism
of the heart?
1. I have stated in the first lecture that
the soul of man ever strives onward and upward;
that its goal is the establishment of the
kingdom of heaven, which consists in reverence
before God above, and in love towards
man here below. I have stated that of this
journey of the soul heavenward, literature is
the record; that the various phases of literary
development are only so many mile-posts on
the road; that after the voices of the singer,
of the protester, of the warrior, are hushed,
there must be heard what must remain forever
the loftiest voice in letters,—the voice
of the preacher, the prophet, the inspirer.
And I have stated that just as Pushkin is the
singer, Gogol the protester, and Turgenef the
 fighter, so is Tolstoy in Russian literature
the preacher, the inspirer.
2. But just because he is the prophet, the
uplifter, the proclaimer, Tolstoy is no longer
the merely Russian writer. Pushkin is the
Russian singer, Gogol is the Russian protester,
and Turgenef is the Russian fighter;
but Tolstoy is not the inspirer of Russia
alone, but of all mankind. Tolstoy has the
least of the Russian in him, because he has
the most of the man in him; he has the least
of the son of the Slav in him, because he has
the most of the Son of God in him. The
voice of Leo Tolstoy is not the voice of the
nineteenth century, but of all centuries; the
voice of Leo Tolstoy is not the voice of one
land, but of all lands; for the voice of Leo
Tolstoy, in short, is the voice of God speaking
through man.
3. For, O my friends, there is a God in
heaven, even though the voices of pessimism
and agnosticism be raised never so high
against him. There is a God who ruleth over
the heavens and over the earth; and he is
boundless with space, and everlasting with
 time; and he is sublime with the sky, and he
twinkleth with the star; and he smileth with
the sun, and he beameth with the moon; and
he floateth with the cloud, and he saileth
with the wind; he flasheth with the lightning,
and resoundeth with the thunder, he heaveth
with the sea, and he dasheth with the surf;
he floweth with the river, and he rusheth
with the torrent; he babbleth with the brook,
and he sparkleth with the dew-drop; he
reposeth with the landscape, and he laugheth
with the meadow; he waveth with the tree,
and he quivereth with the leaf; he singeth
with the bird, and he buzzeth with the bee;
he roareth with the lion, and he pranceth with
the steed; he crawleth with the worm, and
he soareth with the eagle; he darteth with
the porpoise, and he diveth with the fish;
he dwelleth with the loving, and he pleadeth
with the hating; he shineth with the merciful,
and he aspireth with the prayerful. He
is ever nigh unto men,—he, the Prince of
Light!
4. And I say unto ye that the Lord God
hath not hid himself from the hearts of men;
 he that spake unto Moses and the prophets,
and through them,—he is still nigh. He
that spake unto Jesus and the Apostles, and
through them,—he is still nigh. He that
spake to Mohammed and Luther, and through
them,—he is still nigh. He recently spake
through Carlyle and through Emerson, and
their voices are not yet hushed. And he
still speaketh, my friends, through Ruskin
in England and through Tolstoy in Russia,
as he ever shall speak through all earnest
souls who love him with all their heart because
they know him, who seek him with all
their heart because they know him not.
Think not therefore the Lord God hath
ceased to speak unto men through men;
verily, if men but see to it that there be
enough inspired, God will see to it that there
be enough inspirers.