“‘Aye, aye, fellows, what is the matter;
why so quiet?’ said at last Bulba, waking up
from his revery. ‘One would think you were a
crowd of Tartars. Well, well, to the Evil One
with your thoughts! Just take your pipes between
your teeth, and let us have a smoke, and
give our horses the spurs. Then we will fly
that even a bird could not catch us!’
“And the Cossaks, leaning over their horses,
were lost in the grass. Now even their black
caps could no longer be seen; only a track of
trampled-down grass traced their swift flight.
“The sun had long been looking forth on
the cleared heavens, and poured over the whole
steppe its refreshing warmth-breathing light.
Whatever was dim and sleepy in the Cossaks'
souls suddenly fled; their hearts began to beat
faster, like birds'.
“The farther they went, the more beautiful
the steppe grew. In those days the vast expanse
which now forms New Russia, to the very
shores of the Black Sea, was green, virgin desert.
The plough had never passed along the immeasurable
waves of the wild plants. Horses alone,
whom they hid, were trampling them down.
Nothing in Nature could be more beautiful.
The whole surface of the land presented a
greenish-golden ocean, on which were sparkling
millions of all manner of flowers. Through
the thin high stalks of the grass were reaching
forth the light-blue, dark-blue, and lilac-colored
flowers; the yellow broom-plant jumped out
above, with its pyramid-like top. The white
clover, with its parasol-shaped little caps, shone
gayly on the surface. A halm of wheat, brought
hither God knows whence, was playing the
lonely dandy. By the thin roots of the grasses
were gliding the prairie-chicks, stretching out
their necks. The air was filled with a thousand
different whistles of birds. In the sky
floated immovably hawks, their wings spread
wide, their eyes steadily fixed on the grass.
The cry of a cloud of wild geese moving on
the side was heard on a lake, Heaven knows
how far off. With measured beating of its
wings there rose from the grass a gull, and
bathed luxuriously in the blue waves of the atmosphere.
Now she is lost in the height, now
she gleams as a dark point; there, she has
turned on her wings, and has sparkled in the
 sun!… The Devil take ye, ye steppes, how
beautiful you are!”
8. If the height of the mount, swelling as it
does the breast of the mountaineer, makes his
spirit free by filling his lungs to their very
roots, how much more must the steppe liberate
the spirit of man by giving the eye an ever-fleeing
circle to behold whithersoever it turn!
How much more free than the mountaineer
must the son of the steppe feel, for whom
distance hath no terror, since go he never so
far, he beholds the same sky, the same horizon,
the same grass, and his cheek is fanned
by the same breeze! To jump upon his faithful
steed, to prick her sides with the spur, to
be off in the twinkling of an eye with the
swiftness of the wind, at the least discontent,
is therefore as natural to the Russian of the
South as it is for the Russian of the North to
endure patiently in his place of birth whatever
Fortune hath in store for him. The
Cossak has therefore for ages been on land
what the sailor is on sea,—light-hearted, jolly
when with comrades, melancholy when alone;
but whether with his mates or alone, of a spirit
 indomitably free. And Gogol was a Cossak.
Southern Russia had not as yet produced a
single great voice, because Southern Russia,
New Russia, had as yet no aristocracy. Gogol
is thus the only great Russian writer who
sprang not from an autocracy whitewashed
with Western culture, but from the genuine
Russian people. It is this which makes
Gogol the most characteristic of Russian
writers.