“No, I no longer can endure it. God, what
are they doing to me! They pour cold water
on my head! They neither mind me, nor do
they see me, nor do they hear me. What have
I done to them? What do they wish of poor
me? What can I give them? I have nothing.
I have no more strength. I no longer
can endure all their torment; my head is afire,
and all around me is in a whirl. Save me!
Take me! Give me a span of horses swift
as the wind! Get up, driver; ring, little bell;
off ye horses, and carry me off from this
world! Away, away, that I see nothing more,—nothing.
Ha! there is the sky vaulting before
me; a star sparkles in the distance; there
rushes the forest with its dark trees, and the
moon. A gray fog spreads under my feet; a
string resounds in the fog; on one side is the
sea, on the other Italy; now Russian huts are
already in sight. Is this my home which rises
blue in the distance? Is it my mother sitting at
the window? Dear mother, save your poor boy;
drop a tearlet on his sick head. See how they
torment him; press your poor orphan to your
breast! There is no place for him on this wide
earth! He is chased! Dear mother, have pity
on your sick babe!… By the way, do you
know, the Emperor of Algeria has a wart under
his very nose!”
25. With the completion of the first part of
“Dead Souls,” Gogol had reached the height
 as a protester. He had now exhausted this
side of his life,—the side which was the
essence of his being, the side which made
him the individual person as distinct from the
rest of men. After the first part of “Dead
Souls” his message unto men was a thing of
the past. Henceforth, whatever he could do,
could only be a repetition of his former burning
words, and hence only a weaker utterance.
This is precisely what happens to most
men of letters when they persist in speech
after naught is left them to say. You need
only be reminded of Bryant in this country,
who had exhausted all the music of his
soul in his younger days, and of Tennyson
in England, who as shadowy Lord Tennyson
can only ignobly borrow of marrowy
Alfred Tennyson. But Gogol was too conscientious
an artist to allow himself to become
prey of such literary sin. If produce
he must, it shall be no repetition of his former
self, but in a still higher field than mere
protest. Accordingly, he attempted in his
second part of “Dead Souls” to paint an
ideal Russia, just as in the first part he had
 painted the real Russia. Here, however, he
undertook what was above his genius: the
skylark is indeed a noble bird, but is unfit
for the flight of the eagle. Who was by nature
only a protester could not by sheer force
of will be transformed into the idealizing constructor.
And of this, Gogol himself soon
became aware. To the very end he was discontented
with his second part, and finally,
before his death, gave it over to the flames.
26. The heavenly spark which gleamed
within him could not, however, be put out.
Letters proper he at last indeed forsook, but
he now became profoundly religious; he
gave up all his possessions to the poor, and
when he needed moneys wherewith to make
a pilgrimage to what was to him a veritably
Holy Land, he had to publish some of his
intimate correspondence.
27. This work proved the bitterness of the
rest of his days. It roused a clamor against
the poor author altogether out of proportion
to the slight merit of the work. Gogol was
denounced on all sides as a renegade; the
relentless accuser of autocracy in  “The Revisor”
could not be forgiven for the spirit of
Christian humility and resignation to the will
of God which breathed from these letters. It
was in the forties. Those were the days when
a Hegelian wave went over Russian minds.
God had been philosophized away to make
place for the Absolute, and even school-boys
came home to announce the astounding news
that there was no longer any God. Who was
not a doubter, a disbeliever, was unhesitatingly
declared an imbecile; and Gogol's correspondence,
breathing as it does the spirit of
the deepest godfulness, came upon his friends
like a note of discord at a concert. His
friends declared him insane, and all manner
of advice offered, which could not fail to
make him truly insane. The already melancholy
Gogol now became lonely, dejected,
and sought consolation now more than ever
in fasting and prayer. Poor Gogol had not
yet learned that complete salvation is found
not in praying, but in doing. While his ills
therefore increased his devotion, his devotion
likewise in turn increased his ills; his body
became emaciated, his mind was wrecked,
 and early in 1852 he was found one morning
starved to death, prostrated before the holy
images, in front of which he had spent his
last days.
28. Next to Tolstoy, Gogol is perhaps the
most lovable figure in Russian literature. I
say lovable, because he was at bottom a hapless
man,—a man who had fed on his own
mighty heart. There is a Carlylesqueness
about his woe that makes his life immeasurably
pitiful. Pushkin's sorrow one finds it
difficult to lament deeply, since it was mostly
of his own making; but Gogol's was the sorrowful
lot of all heaven-aspiring souls who
have not yet attained the last, safest haven
of rest in God,—that haven from which the
soul no longer cries in agony of spirit, “My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me!”
but rather, “Father, thou knowest wherefore
all this is; thy will be done!” His soul in
its loneliness and restlessness knew nor sympathy
nor appreciation of what was to him
his deepest life; and this the loving soul
ever craves most hungeringly. When the
great soul had departed, gone irrevocably,
 men readily enough recognized that the light
of Israel had gone out; but the recognition
came too late, the love came when it could
no longer heal his wounded spirit.