“The moon had for some time been shining
from the high heavens upon the whole court,
its sleeping folk, the thick clump of willows and
the high wild oats in which was drowned the
fence surrounding the court. Still she was sitting
at the head-side of her darling boys, not
taking her eyes off them for a moment, and not
even thinking of sleep. The horses, already
feeling the morrow, had all lain down in the
grass, and ceased feeding. The upper leaves
of the willows began to whisper, and little by
little a whispering wave descended along them
to the very bottom. But she was still sitting
up till daybreak, not at all tired, but inwardly
wishing that the night might last only longer.
From the steppe came up the loud neighing of
a colt; red bars gleamed brightly along the
sky.…
“When the mother saw that at last her sons
also were now seated on their horses, she rushed
to the youngest, in whose features there seemed
to be more of a certain tenderness, seized his
spur, clung to his saddle, and with despair in her
eyes, she held fast to him. Two robust Cossaks
 took gently hold of her and carried her
into the house. But when they rode out beyond
the gates, with the lightness of a wild
stag, incompatible with her years, she ran out
beyond the gates, and with incomprehensible
strength she stopped the horse and embraced
one of her sons with a kind of crazy, feelingless
feverishness. Again she was carried off.
“The young Cossaks rode in silence, and held
back their tears in fear of their father, who,
however, was for his part not wholly at ease,
though he tried not to betray himself. The sky
was gray; the green was sparkling with a glare;
the birds were singing as if in discord. The
Cossaks, after riding some distance, looked back.
Their farm-house seemed to have gone down
into the ground. Above ground were seen only
the two chimneys of their modest house, and
the tops of the trees, along whose branches
they had been leaping like squirrels [in their
childhood.] There still was stretched before
them that prairie which held for them the
whole history of their life, from the years
when they made somersaults on its thick grass,
to the years when they would await there the
black-browed Cossak dame as she was tripping
swiftly along with her fresh light step. Now
they see only the pole over the well, and the
cart-wheel, tied to its top, alone sticks out on
the sky. And now the plain they had just passed
 seems a distant mount, hiding everything behind
it.… Farewell, childhood, and play, and
all, and all!…”
18. I had hoped at first to be able to give
you a few passages from this noblest of epic
poems which might give you some idea of
its wild, thrilling beauty: the jolly life at the
syetch; the sudden transformation of the
frolicking, dancing, gambling crowd into a
well-disciplined army of fierce warriors, which
strikes terrors into the hearts of the Poles.
I hoped to be able to give you Gogol's own
account of the slaying of Andrei, his youngest
son, by Bulba himself, because, bewitched
by a pair of fair eyes, he became traitor to
the Cossaks. I wished to quote to you the
stoic death, under the very eyes of his father,
of Ostap, the oldest son, torn as he is alive to
pieces, not a sound escaping his lips, but at
the very last moment, disheartened at the sea
of hostile faces about him, crying only, “Father,
seest thou all this?” I wished to quote
to you Bulba's own terrible death, nailed
alive to a tree, which is set on fire under him;
the old hero, still intent on the salvation of
 his little band, while the smoke envelops him,
cries, as he beholds the movement of the
enemy, “To the shore, comrades, to the
shore! Take the path to the left!” But I
found I should have to quote to you the entire
book; for there is not a single page of
this poem from which beauty does not shine
forth with dazzling radiance. Homer often
nods in the Iliad, but in “Taras Bulba” Gogol
never nods. And as the painter of old on
being asked to remove the curtain that the
picture might be seen replied, “The curtain
is the picture,” so can I only say to you,
“Read ‘Taras Bulba,’ and it shall be its
own commentary unto you!”
19. With “Taras Bulba,” Gogol had
reached the height as a singer. On this
road there was no longer any progress for
his soul, and to remain a cheerful, right-glad
singer in the midst of the sorrowing, overburdened
country was impossible to a man of
Gogol's earnestness. For his first and last
end was to serve his country. 'Tis well, if
he could serve it by letters, equally well, if
he could serve it by his simple life. Gogol,
 therefore, now decided to devote the rest of
his days to the unveiling of the ills to which
the Russian Colossus was subject, in the hope
that the sight of the ugly cancer would help
its removal. Thus he became the conscious
protester, the critic of autocracy; and he became
such because his gifts were best fitted
for such labor. For coupled with his unsurpassed
gift of story-telling was another distinct
trait of the Cossak in him,—the ability
of seeing good-humoredly the frailties of
man; and his humor, undefiled by the scorn
of the cynic, proved a most powerful weapon
in his hands. Ridicule has ever proved a
terror to corruption. But in the hands of
Gogol this ridicule became a weapon all the
more powerful because it took the shape of
impersonal humor where the indignation of
the author was kept out of sight, so that even
stern Nicolas himself, the indirect source of
the very corruption satirized in “The Revisor,”
could laugh, while a listener to the play,
until the tears ran down his cheeks and his
sides ached. The corruption of provincial
officials, which is the natural sore following
 all autocratic blood-poisoning, found merciless
treatment at the hands of Gogol in his
comedy “The Revisor.” Its plot is briefly
as follows:—