9. Gogol was born in the province of Poltava,
in 1810. His grandfather was an honored
member of the government of the Cossak
Republic, which at that time formed almost
a state within the state. It was he that entertained
his grandson with the stories of the
life of the Cossaks, their adventures, their
wars, as well as with the tales of devils, of
apparitions, of which that country is full, and
which form the principal amusement of the
people during their long winter evenings.
10. We shall see later that the essential
characteristic of Gogol's art was his wonderful
power as a teller of a story. This came to
him directly from the grandfather through the
 father. But the father was already a man of a
certain degree of culture. He was fond of
reading, subscribed to the magazines, loved
to entertain, and more than once had even
private theatricals at his house.
11. The boy grew up at home till he was
twelve years old. But at that age he was sent
away to school at Nyezhin, with results questionable
enough. The only signs of promise he
showed were a strong memory and an honest
but intense dislike of those studies which are
only useful when forgotten. The problem
as to the necessity of making children familiar
with Timbuctoo, Popocatepetl, parallelopipeds,
and relative dative and absolute
ablative, the boy settled for himself in clear-headed
boyish fashion. He hated mathematics,
he hated the ancient languages. Accordingly,
though he stayed three years under
the professor of Latin, all he could learn was
the first paragraph of a Latin Reader which
begins with the instructive sentence: Universus
mundus in duas distribuitur partes;
from which circumstance poor Gogol was
ever after known among his mates under
 the name of Universus Mundus. Teachers
and scholars therefore scorned poor Universus
Mundus; but the boy faithfully kept
a book under his desk during recitations,
and read most diligently, leaving Universus
Mundus to run its own course.
12. But if the boy did not lead his fellow-pupils
in familiarity with Popocatepetl and
parallelopiped, he did lead them in intellectual
energy and practical life; a voracious
reader, a passionate student of Zhukofsky
and Pushkin, he founded not only a college
review, which he filled mostly with his own
contributions, but also a college theatre, which
furnished entertainment not only to the boys
themselves, but even to the citizens of the
town. Nor did the boy rest until he saw
his efforts towards founding a college library
crowned with success.
13. This public spirit, which became in time
all-absorbing to him, thus showed itself even
in his boyhood. It was not long before the
purpose of his life which hitherto manifested
itself unconsciously now became the conscious
part of his existence; and when in
 1828 the boy left the Nyezhin Gymnasium,
he was already filled with conscious desire to
serve God with all his soul and man with all
his heart. But as the body on its entrance
into life must go through a baptism of water,
so the soul on its entrance into life must go
through a baptism of fire, and the fire to
poor Gogol was scorching enough. Deeply
religious towards God, nobly enthusiastic towards
men, the boy in his simplicity, innocence,
and trustfulness found himself repelled
by an unsympathetic and hampered by a misunderstanding
world, which instead of encouraging
the sympathy-hungry youth, was
only too ready to laugh to scorn with its superior
wisdom the dreams of the visionary.
The home, the province, now becomes too
narrow for the rapidly unfolding soul. To
St. Petersburg he must go, the capital of
talent, of aspiration, of hope, where are
published the magazines so eagerly devoured
in the days gone by,—to the capital, where
dwell Zhukofsky and Pushkin. There his
talents shall be recognized, and an appreciating
world shall receive the new-comer
 with open arms. The arms of the world do
indeed open on his arrival at St. Petersburg,
but it is the cold embrace of want, of friendlessness.
In St. Petersburg begins for him a
struggle for existence which well-nigh ruins
him forever. Bread is not easily earned. Congenial
society does not readily seek him out,
and the sympathetic appreciation his starving
soul craves is still as far as ever. Inevitable
disappointment of hero-worship also quickly
comes. When he calls at the door of the
idolized Pushkin late in the morrow, he is
told by the valet that the great man is deigning
to be asleep at this late hour. “Ah, your
master has been composing some heavenly
song all night!” “Not at all; he has been
playing cards till seven in the morning!”
And to complete his doom, his tender susceptible
heart begins to flutter with right
serious ado at the sight of a dame of high
social position who hardly deigns to cast even
a glance at the moneyless, ill-clad, clumsy, rustic
lad,—sorrows enough for a soul far better
equipped for battle with Fortune than this
poor Cossak lad. Total ruin is now dangerously
 nigh. And here Gogol becomes high-handed.
He must be off, away from this
suffocation of disappointment and despair.
He must seek new fields; if Fortune is not
to be found in St. Petersburg, then it shall
be sought beyond St. Petersburg; and if not
in Russia, then out of Russia. Not him shall
sportive Fortune flee; not him, the youth of
merit, the youth of promise. In the days of
yore he had charmed the good folk of Nyezhin
by his acting from the stage the part of
an old woman. Wherefore not conquer Fortune
as an old woman, if she favor not the
young man? In a foreign land he might yet
find his goal as an actor, and he decides to
exile himself. Of moneys there are indeed
none. Fortunately his mother, now already
a widow, sends him some moneys wherewith
to pay off their pledged estate. But the dutiful
son keeps the moneys, advises his mother
to take in return his share of his father's estate,
and departs for the promised land. He
goes to Germany, to Lubeck, to conquer Fortune
as an actor.