29. My friends, “Taras Bulba” will thrill
your soul with inexpressible beauty. Gogol's
“Revisor” will amuse you. His “Dead
Souls” will instruct you; but his life, if you
study it faithfully, should prove his greatest
work unto you, for it should stir you,—stir
you to tenderness, stir you to sympathy, stir
you to compassion for those sufferers, the like
of Gogol, who are never wanting, in whatever
age, in whatever clime, in whatever
walk of life. Would to God, my friends, you
could carry away from Gogol's life with you
this lesson: In your very midst, perhaps this
very day, there doubtless walks among you
some mighty spirit, some hungry soul. Seek
him out, find him out, that not of ye at least
shall be said those immeasurably sorrowful
words which could be said of the countless
friends of Gogol,—they came with their
sympathy—too late!
1. In the history of Russian letters, Ivan
Turgenef is the most complex figure. Nay,
with the exception of Shakespeare he is perhaps
the most complex figure in all literature.
He is universal, he is provincial; he is pathetic,
he is sneering; he is tender, he is
merciless; he is sentimental, he is frigid.
He can be as compact as Tacitus, and as
prolix as Thackeray. He can be as sentimental
as Werther, and as heartless as Napoleon.
He can cry with the bird, grow with
the grass, and hum with the bee; he can float
with the spirits, and dream with the fevered.
He is everywhere at home: in the novel, in
the story, in the sketch, in the diary, in the
epistle. Whatever form of composition he
 touches, let once his genius be mature, and it
turns to gold under his hands. On reading
through his ten volumes you leave him with
the feeling that you have just emerged from
the virgin forests of South America; your
head is full of monkeys frolicking about, with
an occasional cocoanut shot at you, your
head is full of the birds with their variegated
plumage, of the fragrance of the flowers, of
the dusk about you, and of the primeval stillness
of the forest. And the collective impression
of the writer, the man, left upon you is
that of some invisible but consummate artist
who had been passing before you all manner
of photographs made lurid by the glare of the
stereopticon: photograph now of sunset cloud,
now of lover's scene in the lane, now of a
dyspeptic, long-haired, wrinkled old man. The
writer Turgenef has thus been for years an
enigma. Katkof, the pillar of Russian autocracy,
claims him as his, and the revolutionists
claim him as theirs; the realists point
to him as one of the apostles of their new
gospel, and the idealists point to him as the
apostle of theirs. Now he defies public opinion
 by befriending an obnoxious exile, now
he shrinks before it by disclaiming almost his
acquaintance. Between the contending parties,
poor Turgenef shared the fate of the
child of the women who did not come to
King Solomon for advice in their dispute
about its mother. The poor child was pulled
by each until disfigured for life. So Turgenef
between the different parties, each claiming
him as its own, remained homeless, almost
friendless, to the end of his days, belonging
to none; and though surrounded by all manner
of society and companionship which fame,
wealth, and position could give, he was yet at
bottom solitary, for he went through the world
a man who was misunderstood.
2. His position in letters is therefore anomalous.
Russians blame him, but read him;
and Americans praise him, and read him not.
Englishmen quote him, Frenchmen write essays
on him, and Germans write books about
him; but all agree in wondering at him, all
agree in not comprehending him. And yet
Turgenef's life and the purpose of his books
is plain enough to him that comes to view
 him with eyes as yet uncovered by partisan
glasses. Turgenef the realist, Turgenef the
idealist, is enigmatic enough; but once understood
that Turgenef was the literary warrior
against what was to him a mortal enemy, and
his whole life and all his important works at
once become explicable, consistent.
3. For man is something more than the
mere sum of his abilities. Behind all the
forces of the man, whether of body or of
mind, there stands the soul, which uses them
for purposes of its own, be they for better or
for worse. And of these there is always one
which in time becomes the absorbent of all
its life, the essence of all its being; and such
purpose is soon found in the life of every
man who lives, and not merely exists; such
purpose is soon found in the mightiest as
well as in the frailest, in the loftiest as well
as in the lowest. And till such purpose is understood,
the life of the man is to beholders
what the flower is to the eye when looked at
through a microscope,—an expanse of mere
tissue, rough, formless, confusing; but such
purpose once understood, the soul is transformed
 to the beholder as if made of glass,
transparent, uniform, simple.
4. Such purpose runs like a woof through
the whole being of Turgenef. He is a hunter,
he is a clubman, he is a philanthropist, he
is an artist; but he is first of all a warrior,
because he is first of all a lover of his country,
and a hater of what oppresses it. He
does indeed much else besides fighting for
the emancipation of the land of his birth;
but he does it in the same spirit in which sensible
folk go to dinners not for the sake of
eating, to receptions not for the sake of being
received, and wear kid gloves in summer not
for the sake of keeping the hands warm;
these things, meaningless in themselves, are
only incidentals in the life of the spirit, which
alone can be said to have any meaning.