20. Tolstoy's masterpieces therefore are
panoramas, and his art instinctively seeks that
material which easiest lends itself to such
purpose. Hence his “Cossaks,” hence his
“Scenes before Sebastopol,” hence his
“Nekhludof.” But a panorama needs no
plot. Hence his “Childhood, Boyhood, and
Youth” contains not even a trace of a plot.
It is merely a series of pictures, each indeed
in itself a thing of unspeakable beauty, but
all grouped in such a manner as to give collectively
a panorama of the entire growth of a
human soul from the moment it ceases to be
 animal until it becomes man. In a panorama
it matters little where each particular group is
placed; just as in Kaulbach's “Era of the
Reformation” it matters little whether the
figure of Luther is on the left or on the right.
“War and Peace” is thus like the Battle of
Gettysburg, a vast panorama, and “Anna
Karenina” is a vast panorama; the one is
a panorama of the political life of the State,
the other is a panorama of the spiritual life of
the individual. But a panorama requires not
so much plots as groups; hence “War and
Peace” is not one story, but three stories;
and each is the story not of one person or
of one pair, but of a group of persons, of a
group of pairs. And the same necessity we
see in “Anna Karenina;” here again Tolstoy's
materials are not persons but groups.
Viewed as a work of architecture, the book
seems to lack form, the author seems to lack
the sense of proportion; for the book could
be easily split into two different novels,—the
novel of Levin and Kitty on the one hand,
and the novel of Vronsky and Anna on the
other. As works of architecture, neither would
 suffer if severed from the other. But as a
panorama of the unfolding of heaven in the
soul of Levin, and of hell in the soul of Anna,
the story of Kitty and Levin cannot be read
apart from the story of Anna and Vronsky
and still remain a unit, and still remain
intelligible.
21. This fact of Tolstoy's art being essentially
panoramic and not architectural, accounts
for the vast expanse of his two great
works, “War and Peace” and “Anna Karenina.”
For it is the very nature of a panorama
to be on an extensive scale. The objection
therefore made to these two masterpieces
that they are too voluminous would indeed
be relevant, if they had been conceived as
works of architecture; but it is totally irrelevant
when applied to a panorama. Which
form of art is superior, which inferior,—the
concise, compact, rigid severity of the architect's
art, or the overflowing, expanding,
hence unshackled art of the panorama? Methinks
you can best answer this question yourselves
by asking another. Which is higher
as a work of art, that tender song without
 words by Mendelssohn, called “Regret,” or
that indescribably affecting capriccio of his
marked as “Opus 33”? Which is higher
as a work of art,—that in its sadness unparalleled
song of Shakespeare, “Blow, blow,
thou Winter wind,” or his “Othello”? Or
again; which is a higher work of art, a nocturne
by Chopin, or a sonata by Beethoven;
an Essay by Macaulay, or a “Decline and
Fall” by Gibbon? Lastly, which is higher as a
work of art,—the wonderfully accurate spiritedness
of Schreyer's painting of a horse, or
the indescribable power of Wagner's Race
in a Roman Circus? On its plane each of
the above is indeed of the highest; but that
the one is on a higher plane than the other
few can fail to observe. For, execution of
design being equal, the broader the scene, the
wider the horizon, the more comprehensive
the view, the higher must be the art. The
less extended, because more easily comprehended,
may indeed at first give more pleasure
than the second; but if the final arbiter
in art be the amount of immediate pleasure to
be got from it, then Barnum's Circus is indeed
 a greater work of art than Emerson's Book,
and Mark Twain a greater writer than Carlyle.
But if creative power be the final measure
of art, execution in the different planes
being equal, then Beethoven must rank higher
than Chopin, Shakespeare higher than Blanco
White, Wagner than Meyer von Bremen, and
Tolstoy than Turgenef.
22. “Have you seen any of my later writings?”
Tolstoy inquired of a visitor who came
to him as the admirer of “The Cossaks,” of
“War and Peace,” of “Anna Karenina.”
The question referred to his religious writings.
When he was told no, Tolstoy could
only exclaim, “Ah, then you do not know me
at all. We must then become acquainted.”
In his “Confession,” he is no less emphatic;
there he boldly declares the art of which he
has been a noble follower for some twenty
years,—“balovstv[=o],” foolish waste of time.
23. A most wonderful spectacle is thus
presented: on the one hand a writer gaining
Shakespearian renown for works he repudiates;
on the other, a public reading and admiring
him because of the very art he thus
 repudiates. For 'tis idle to assert that Tolstoy's
religious writings are what draws readers
unto him. Had he published only his
religious writings, they might have indeed
been bought, they might have found their
place on parlor table, they might have even
occasionally been glanced into; but read and
studied and pondered they would not have
been. For Tolstoy's religious writings, in their
spirit, are not one whit different from that of
The Book which has indeed been for ages
lying in the parlors of almost every Christian
household; but it is not read, it is not discussed,
it is not talked about, like the latest
somersaulting performance of some popular
magazine-scribe. Nay, the surest way to
make one's self unavailable nowadays at social
gathering of the parlor sort would be to
talk therein solemnly of the very book which
in so many houses forms such indispensable
part of parlor outfit. Nay, has it not come
in society to such a pass that the very presence
of The Book on parlor table is already
an evidence that the host is not a member of
the circle which looks upon itself as the circle,—the
 select, the exclusive, the highest,
in short?
24. The public, then, is interested in Tolstoy
the artist more than in the preacher, for
the same reason that when Emerson lands in
England only a handful of mortals greet him;
while when Mr. Sullivan lands in England the
streets cannot hold the thousands who flock
to receive him. Tolstoy, on the other hand,
protests that whosoever looks to him as the
artist, sees not him, knows not him; that he
is aught else now; that mere art, in fact, is to
him a business no longer worthy of a serious
soul. The public again, in its ever-confident
patronizingness, says unto him: “But for thy
great artistic genius, O Leo, son of Nicolas,
with thy latest religious antics and somersaultings,
we would call thee—a crank. But
as to a great genius we shall be merciful unto
thee, and bear with many a confession, many
a cobbled shoe, if thou givest us only more
of Olenins, more of Karenins.”