“Vasili, who bestows the alms on the journey,
 is giving Philip directions how to strengthen
the trace; and it is only when all is ready, and
Philip, gathering up the reins, climbs upon the
box, that he begins to draw something from his
side pocket. But we have no sooner started
than a dazzling flash of lightning, which fills the
whole ravine for a moment with its fiery glare,
brings the horses to a stand, and is accompanied,
without the slightest interval, by such
a deafening clap of thunder that it seems as
though the whole vault of heaven were falling
in ruins upon us. The wind increases;
the manes and tails of the horses, Vasili's
cloak, and the edges of the apron, take one
direction, and flutter wildly in the bursts of the
raging gale. A great drop of rain fell heavily
upon the leather hood of the britchka, then a
second, a third, a fourth; and all at once it beat
upon us like a drum, and the whole landscape
resounded with the regular murmur of falling
rain. I perceive, from the movement of Vasili's
elbow, that he is untying his purse; the beggar,
still crossing himself and bowing, runs close to
the wheel, so that it seems as if he would be
crushed. ‘Give-for-Christ's-sake!’ At last a
copper groschen flies past us, and the wretched
creature halts with surprise in the middle of the
road; his smock, wet through and through, and
clinging to his lean limbs, flutters in the gale,
and he disappears from our sight.
“The slanting rain, driving before a strong
wind, poured down as from a bucket; streams
trickled from Vasili's frieze back into the puddle
of dirty water which had collected on the apron.
The dust, which at first had been beaten into
pellets, was converted into liquid mud, through
which the wheels splashed; the jolts became
fewer, and turbid brooks flowed in the ruts.
The lightning-flashes grew broader and paler;
the thunder-claps were no longer so startling
after the uniform sound of the rain.
“Now the rain grows less violent; the thunder-cloud
begins to disperse; light appears in
the place where the sun should be, and a scrap
of clear azure is almost visible through the
grayish-white edges of the cloud. A moment
more, and a timid ray of sunlight gleams in
the pools along the road, upon the sheets of fine,
perpendicular rain which fall as if through a
sieve, and upon the shining, newly washed verdure
of the wayside grass.
“The black thunder-cloud overspreads the opposite
portion of the sky in equally threatening
fashion, but I no longer fear it. I experience
an inexpressibly joyous feeling of hope in life;
which has quickly taken the place of my oppressive
sensation of fear. My soul smiles, like
Nature, refreshed and enlivened.”
[1] Imperfect pronunciation of batiuschka, “little father.”