And the gates of heaven opened, and John
embraced the repenting sinner, and admitted
him into the kingdom of heaven.
11. Tolstoy, then, is the sole example among
men of the harmonious combination of loftiest
aspiration with highest artistic skill. Tolstoy
sees in himself only the preacher, and
therefore at the age of sixty he does not hesitate
to repudiate all those works of his which
are not those of the preacher, however great
their value as works of art. Turgenef sees in
him only the artist, and therefore beseeches
from his death-bed his fellow-craftsman to
give himself back to the forsaken art. Both
 are here right, both are here wrong. For
each sees only one side, while Tolstoy is neither
the preacher alone nor the artist alone.
Tolstoy, like Janus of old, is two-faced,—the
artist, when his soul is in a state of war; the
preacher, when his soul is in a state of peace.
Turgenef looks only upon the face of the
artist; Tolstoy looks out into the world with
the face of the preacher.
12. This noble combination of the preacher
and the artist has accordingly determined the
character of Tolstoy's art. For the first question
Tolstoy asks of every event, of every
phenomenon he has to depict, is, What effect
has this on the soul of man; what bearing
has this on the life of man; what, in short, is
its moral meaning? Hence when Tolstoy
paints, he paints not only objectively, but
also subjectively. In the storm-scene, for
instance, which I have read you at the first
lecture, Tolstoy is not satisfied to give you
merely the outward appearance of the storm,
its appearance in Nature, he rests not until
he has painted also its effect on the soul; and
the progress of the terror inspired keeps pace
 with the advance of the cloud. Hence the
sudden introduction of the beggar from under
the bridge, with his horrible stump of hand
stretched out as he runs beside the carriage
begging for alms. This incident is as much
part of the storm, and as terrifying to the
little Katenka and the little Lubotshka as the
glare of the lightning and the crash of the
thunder. Tolstoy the artist never sees Nature
with the eyes of the body, but with the eyes
of the spirit, he never sees matter without the
underlying mind; he never sees the object
without its complement, the subject. Tolstoy,
therefore, is the first great artist (and if the
one-eyed prophets of the merely objective art
prevail, who now clamor so loudly, he promises,
alas! to remain also the last) who has
painted Nature entire. Tolstoy is the first
great artist, therefore, into whose pictures enter
not only the details visible, but also the
details invisible. To Tolstoy, the vibration of
the string is not described in completeness
until he has also shown how its music has
made to vibrate not only the air, but also
the soul. Painter then of the inward universe
 as well as of the outward, of the
spiritual as well as of the natural, of the
things unseen as well as of those seen, Tolstoy
has exhausted Nature. He has plunged
into her nethermost depths, like Schiller's
diver, and lo! forth he comes from the abyss
with her swallowed-up treasure. Verily, here
Tolstoy is unapproachable. Only one other
man of letters hath here even distant fellowship
with him, and this is Ralph Waldo
Emerson.
13. That an art which is born of such a
union of the preacher with the worshipper of
beauty as it exists in Tolstoy, can only be of
the highest, and must be of the highest, I
therefore no longer hesitate to affirm. Read,
therefore, in this light the successive chapters in
Book VII. of “Anna Karenina,” where is told
the birth of a son of Kitty and Levin. Our
modern apostles of the gospel of fidelity at all
hazards, even though it be the fidelity of dirt,
would have here made you look at the blood,
at the towels, at the bowls, at the bottles,
would have made you smell the odors,—they
would have recounted to you all those
 details which, however pathetic to those
doomed to be by-standers in the sick-room,
can only be nauseating to those out of the
sick-room. Tolstoy the preacher is impressed
with the immeasurable pain which attends
the entrance into the world of a newly-born
human soul,—agony unendurable, all
the more unendurable because inexplicable,
inscrutable. His great artistic soul rests not
until it hath relieved itself with at least a cry
over such sorrow. Paint it therefore he must;
but he paints it, observe, not directly, by
photographing the tortures of Kitty, but indirectly,
by picturing the agony of Levin; for
the one would have only nauseated, the other
stirs the reader to his very depths. The husband
suffers more than the wife, because he
sees her not with the eyes of the head, but
with the eyes of the heart; the groans of
Kitty, which reach him from the neighboring
chamber, can indeed be silenced by the
physician's drug; but no drug can silence the
groan of Levin, for it is pressed out by the
agony, not of the body, but by the agony of
the soul. And as love, sympathy, is ever an
 eye-opener, so here Tolstoy, the consummate
artist, has reproduced the scene of the
sick-room with the highest fidelity, because
he has reproduced it not with the arts of
cold mechanical photography, but with those
of warm, sympathetic imagination. Tolstoy
reproduces therefore with the highest faithfulness
because he too sees not with the eye
of the head, but with the eye of the heart.
14. And for the highest example of such
art I will venture to read to you the passage
in which Tolstoy tells of Anna Karenina's fall.
Until the reader comes to this passage, there
is not a syllable to tell him that she has fallen.
Observe then Tolstoy's manner of telling it.
I venture to think it far more faithful than
any realistic art could have made it by furnishing
details not necessarily more true because
less delicate:—