5. And of these Heaven-sent inspirers,
Tolstoy is the latest. But do not believe that
in saying that he is Heaven-sent I attempt to
explain aught. The highest is ever inexplicable,
and it is the bane of modern science
that it is ever ready to explain what cannot
 be explained. Before the highest we can
only stand dumb; and this has been the feeling
of the greatest, because of the humblest,
of spirits. The Greek painter, therefore,
when about to depict the highest grief of a
father, gives up in despair, and veils the father's
face; and Meyer von Bremen's grandmother,
when confronted with the question
from the children whence came that sweet
babe in her arms, can only reply, “The storks
brought it;” and so I can say to you only,
Tolstoy is sent unto men from Heaven.
6. I say he is Heaven-sent, because he came
to proclaim not what is ephemeral and perishing,
but what is permanent and everlasting.
He came to proclaim not the latest theory of
gravitation, of molecular vibration, of modes of
heat and manners of cold, nor of struggle for
existence, nor of supply and demand, nay, not
even of scientific charity. He came to proclaim
that which was as true in the days of
Jesus as it is true in the days of Darwin,—that
the life of man can have no meaning,
unless when guided by obedience to God
and love to man. Gravitation, struggle for
 existence! The earth has been spinning
round its parent for ages before man's brain-kin
made the marvellous discovery that God's
mysterious impulse which set the earth whirling
through the abysses of space is explained
in right scientific fashion by labelling it gravitation.
This green earth has rolled on, this
green earth will roll on, label or no label;
and the mystery of God men knew not before
gravitation, nor do they know it now
with gravitation. Men have for ages been
multiplying under the blessing of God, and
loving one another, long before that marvellous
discovery was made that man, sprung
from a monkey, and bred in struggle for existence,
is destined at last, under fine progress
of species, to become brutalized with Malthusian
law as a cannibal living on the flesh of
his brother, with self-respect and scientific
charity in most abundant supply and demand.
Tolstoy came to proclaim not the new gospel
of death, but the old gospel of life; not the
new gospel of struggle for existence, but the
old gospel of helpfulness for existence; not
the new gospel of competition, but the old
 gospel of brotherhood. Tolstoy came to proclaim
the gospel of God, the gospel of man,
the gospel of Christ, the gospel of Socrates,
the gospel of Epictetus, of Aurelius, of Carlyle,
of Emerson,—the gospel of reverence
before God and love to man, which is indeed
ever old, but which, alas! the sons of Darkness
see to it that it remain forever new.
7. These, then, are the men among whom
Tolstoy belongs: which of these the greater,
which of these the less? My friends, when
we arrive at these, we are no longer among
the measurable planets, but among the immeasurable
fixed stars. Sirius flashes indeed
with greater splendor than Vega, and Vega
than Arcturus, and Arcturus than Capella,
and Capella flashes with greater splendor than
Aldebaran; but who shall undertake to say
which of these suns is the greater, which
is the less? The difference of splendor is
not in the stars themselves, but in our eyes.
And at this our immeasurable distance from
these souls who are nighest unto the throne
of the Most High, it is not for me, the worm,
as I stand before you, to presume to measure
 which is the greater, which is the less. Rather
than spending our time in profitless weighing
and measuring, let me beseech you to bow
your heads in awe and gratitude, praising God
for the mercy which sendeth now and then
unto men the living voice, the helping voice.
8. Tolstoy, therefore, is one of those spirits
whom I cannot approach with the dissecting-knife,
as the critic does the author, in order to
“account” for him. To do this, that total freedom
from sentiment is required which was
possessed by the enterprising reporter who
on the death of a prominent citizen forthwith
requested an interview with “corpse's uncle.”
In an age when sentiment has become
a byword of impotence, and the heart has
become a mere force-pump for the blood; in
an age when charity has to be put in swaddling-clothes
lest it injure a brother by helping
him; when the poor are preached to by
their rich visiting friends, not to make a home
for themselves when their love for a mate is
born in the heart, but only when it is born
in the purse,—in such an age that reporter's
freedom from sentiment is indeed a most valuable
 acquisition; but I, alas! as yet possess
it not! I shall therefore neither judge the
preacher Tolstoy, nor measure him. I shall
only point out to you to-day wherein he differs,
as he must needs differ, from the rest of
that noble band of the chosen messengers of
God to which he belongs.
9. And the first striking difference is that
Tolstoy is a consummate artist, a creator, in
addition to the great preacher. For Marcus
Aurelius is no artist. He is merely a speaker;
he delivers his message in plain tongue, unadorned,
often even unpolished. Epictetus,
equally simple, equally direct with Marcus
Aurelius, comes, however, already adorned
with a certain humor which now and then
sparkles through his serious pages. Ruskin
brings with him quite a respectable load of
artistic baggage; he brings an incisiveness, a
sarcasm, often a piquancy with him, which
makes him entertaining besides inspiring.
Emerson and Carlyle bring with them much
that, as artistic work; might, under more favorable
auspices, have been worth saving for its
own sake: the one brings a grace, a sportiveness,
 and a brilliancy which fascinates, the
other a fervor, an imagination, a grim-humor,
a lightning-flashing, which dazzles. But none
of these live in letters because of their art.
Were they to depend on this alone, they
would quickly perish. They live because of
the spirit which worketh through them; so
that were you to take the Jeremiah out of
Carlyle, the John the Baptist out of Ruskin,
and the Solomon out of Emerson, you would
deprive them of their literary life. Tolstoy,
however, even though the preacher be gone
from him, still remains a mighty power in
letters because of his art. For not only are
his works filled with the highest purpose,—they
are also created with the highest art.
And I cannot show you this difference any
better than by quoting two passages, one
from Carlyle, the other from Tolstoy, both
treating of the soul's well-nigh noblest emotion,—Repentance.