3. But the time soon arrives when the
soul recognizes that life means something
more than mere existence, something more
than mere enjoyment, something more even
than mere happiness; the time soon arrives
when the soul recognizes that by the side of
the Prince of Light there also dwells the
Prince of Darkness; that not only is there
in the Universe a great God the Good, but
also a great Devil the Evil; and with the
impetuosity and impassionateness of youth
it gives itself up to lamentation, to indignation.
The heart of the poet, the singer,
is now filled with woe; he departs and leaves
behind him only the lamenter, the reproacher,
 the rebel. Job succeeds Miriam, Æschylus
succeeds Homer, Racine and Corneille take
the place of the troubadours, and Byron succeeds
Shakespeare. This is the stage of fruitless
lamentation and protest.
4. But unlike the bear in winter, the soul
cannot feed long on its own flesh, and the
time soon comes when it beholds the wasteful
restlessness of mere indignation, of mere
protest. It sees that to overcome the ill it
must go forth manfully and do battle, and
attack the enemy in his most vulnerable
spots, instead of fruitlessly railing against
him. Literature then becomes full of purpose;
becomes aggressive, attacks now the
throne, now the church, now the law, now
the institution, now the person. Tragedy is
followed by comedy, sentiment by satire;
Æschylus is followed by Aristophanes, Horace
is followed by Juvenal and Martial;
Racine is followed by Voltaire, and Byron
by Dickens. This is the stage of war.
5. But neither is it given unto the soul to
remain long in hatred, for hatred is the child
of Darkness; the goal of the soul is Love,
 since Love is the child of Light. And the
spirit of man soon discovers that the powers
of darkness are not to be conquered by violence,
by battle against the men possessed of
them, but by faith in the final triumph of the
Good, by submission to Fate, by endurance
of what can be borne, by reverence towards
God, and lastly by mercy towards men. The
soul thus discovers its true haven; it lays
down the sword; its voice calls no longer
to strife, but to peace; it now inspires and
uplifts, and Greek literature ends with Socrates
and Plato, Rome with Marcus Aurelius
and Seneca, England with Carlyle and
Ruskin, America with Emerson, and Germany
with Goethe. Letters indeed go on
in England, in America, and in Germany,
but the cycle is completed; and higher than
Plato, Marcus Aurelius, Goethe, Emerson,
Carlyle, and Ruskin, the soul need not seek
to rise. Whatever comes henceforth can add
naught new to its life; the tones may indeed
vary, but the strain must remain the same.
6. The eye of the body never indeed beholds
the perfect circle; however accurately
 the hand draw, the magnifying glass quickly
reveals zigs and zags in the outline. Only
unto the eye of the spirit it is given to behold
things in their perfection, and the soul knows
that there does exist a perfect circle, magnifying
glass or no magnifying glass. So history
shows indeed many an irregularity in the
law just laid down for the development of the
soul, but the law is still there in its perfection,
and Russian literature furnishes the best
illustration of this law. Every literature has
to go through these four stages, but nowhere
have they been passed with such regularity
as in Russia. Accordingly we have in due
order of time Pushkin the singer, Gogol the
protester, Turgenef the warrior, who on the
very threshold of his literary career vows the
oath of a Hannibal not to rest until serfdom
and autocracy are abolished, and lastly we
have Tolstoy the preacher, the inspirer.
7. How this law has operated on Russian
soil, in Russian hearts, is the purpose of these
lectures to show. For while the laws of the
spirit are ever the same in essence, the character
of their manifestation varies with time
 and place, just as in Nature the same force
appears in the firmament as gravitation when
it binds star unto star, as attraction when it
binds in the molecule atom unto atom, and in
man as love when it binds heart unto heart.
The phenomena therefore, natural to all literature,
we shall also find here, but modified
by the peculiar character of the people.