“‘Just see, good people, the old fool has become
crazy,’ said the pale, thin, good mother,
who was standing on the threshold and had not
been able to embrace her darling boys. ‘The
children come home after an absence of over a
year, and he gets it into his head, God knows
what, to box with them.’
“‘Yes, he fights finely,’ said Bulba, stopping.
‘Good, by God!’ he continued, catching a little
breath. ‘So, yes, he will make a fine Cossak,
even without preliminary trial. Well, welcome,
sonny; come kiss me.’ And father and
son began to kiss each other. ‘Good, my son.
Thrash everybody as you have given it to me.
Don't let him go! But I must insist, yours is
a ridiculous rig. What rope is this, dangling
down there!’”
17. Bulba is so pleased with his boys that
he decides to take them the very next day to
the syetch, the republic of the Cossaks, and
there initiate them in the wild, glorious service.
The mother's grief at the unexpected
loss of her boys, as well as the parting itself,
is thus described by Gogol:—
“Night had just enclosed the sky in its embrace;
but Bulba always retired early. He
spread himself out on the mat and covered himself
with the sheep-skin; for the night air was
quite fresh, and Bulba, moreover, was fonder
of warmth when at home. He soon began to
snore, and it was not long before the entire
household did the like. Whatever lay in the
various corners of the court began to snore
and to whiz. Before everybody else fell asleep
the watchman; for in honor of the return of the
young Cossaks he had drunk more than the
rest.
“The poor mother alone was awake. She
nestled herself close to the heads of her dear
boys, who were lying side by side. She combed
their young, carelessly bunched-up locks, and
moistened them with her tears. She gazed
upon them with all her eyes, with all her feelings;
she was transformed into nothing but
sight, and yet she could not look enough at
them. She had fed them from her own breast.
She had raised them, had fondled them, and
now she sees them again only for a moment!
‘My boys, my darling boys, what is to become
of ye, what is in store for ye?’ she spake, and
the tears halted on her wrinkles, which had
changed her once handsome face. In truth,
she was to be pitied, as every woman of that
rough age was to be pitied. Only a moment had
 she lived in love, only in the first fever of passion,
in the first fever of youth, and already her
rough charmer had forsaken her for the sword,
for his companions, for the wild excitement of
war. During the year she saw her husband
perhaps two—three times, and then again for
some years there was not even a trace of him.
And when they did come together, when they
did live together, what sort of life was hers!
She suffered insult, even blows. She received
her fondlings as a kind of alms; she felt herself
a strange creature in this assemblage of wifeless
knights, to whom the loose life of the Cossaks
had given a coloring sombre enough. Youth
flashed by her joylessly, and her beautiful fresh
cheeks and fingers had withered away without
kisses, and were covered with premature
wrinkles. All her love, all her tenderness,
whatever was soft and passionate in woman,
was merged in her into the one feeling of a
mother. With heat, with passion, with tears,
like a gull of the steppe, she was circling about
her babes. Her boys, her darling boys, are to
be taken from her,—taken from her never to be
seen again. Who knows, perhaps at the very
first battle the Tartar shall cut off their heads,
and she shall not know where their castaway
bodies are lying to be pecked in pieces by the
bird of prey, while for every drop of their blood
she would have given up her whole life. Groaning,
 she looked into their eyes, when almighty
sleep began to close them, and she thought to
herself, ‘Perhaps Bulba will change his mind
when he wakes, and put off the departure for a
day or two; perhaps he has decided to go off so
soon because he had taken a little too much.’