4. I have affirmed in my last lecture, with
what articulateness of voice the great God
hath seen fit to endow me, that there is a
God in heaven who is the Good. And it
now, alas! becomes my duty to affirm likewise
that beside the great God the Good in
heaven, there is also the great Devil the Evil
on earth; that beside the great Prince of
Light there is also the great Prince of Darkness.
And he ruleth neither over the heavens
nor over the earth, but he ruleth solely
over man. And he graspeth with the greedy,
and he splitteth hairs with the lawyers; and
he is flirting with scientific charities, and is
fortune-hunting with land-grabbers; and he
discourseth with politicians, and he puffeth
 up with men of science; and he balances
himself on ropes with theologians; and he
preacheth from pulpits through mouths that
have Christ only on their tongues; and he
prayeth through lips that know God only
through hymns; and he danceth at balls,
and he sparkleth through diamonds; and he
shineth through gold, and he foameth through
wine; and he chatteth insincerely at receptions,
and he figureth in society-columns
of the public prints; and he shrieketh
through steam-whistles, and he rusheth sixty
miles an hour, and he edits sensational magazines,
and he dwelleth with the hating; and
he is ever after victims,—he, the Prince of
Darkness.
5. And the servants of the Prince of
Light are few; and the servants of the Prince
of Darkness are many. Yet the Lord God is
ever nigh; and he ever sendeth his messengers
to call together his wandering, his erring
flock. Tolstoy is a messenger sent out to
gather together the erring flock back to the
fold of Christ.
6. Tolstoy, then, is a teacher of men.
 Observe, however, this fundamental difference
between Tolstoy and the other great
teachers. To Socrates, the great enemy of
mankind was ignorance; to him, therefore, to
know virtue is to be virtuous, and the central
idea of his teaching is—knowledge. The seat
of the soul with Socrates, therefore, is not so
much in the heart as in the head. To Epictetus,
the great enemy of mankind is passion,
and the central idea of his teaching is
self-control; to Epictetus, then, the seat of the
soul is not so much in the head as in the will.
To Emerson, the great enemy of mankind is
authority, and the central idea of his teaching,
therefore, is self-reliance; to Emerson, then,
the seat of the soul is not so much in man's will
as in man's pride. To Carlyle, the great enemy
of mankind is consciousness of self, and
the central idea of his teaching is unconsciousness
of self, the forgetting, the drowning of
self in work. To Carlyle, therefore, the seat
of the soul is not so much in man's pride as
in his hands. Tolstoy has no such central
idea of his own. His central idea is that of
his Master, Jesus, which is love. To Jesus, the
 great enemy of man was hatred, and the seat
of the soul to him was neither in the head,
nor in the will, nor in the pride, nor in the
hands. To Jesus, the seat of the soul was
solely in the heart. And Tolstoy proclaims
above all the doctrine of Jesus, not because
he thinketh lightly of ignorance, not
because he thinketh lightly of passion, not
because he thinketh lightly of authority,
not because he thinketh lightly of self-consciousness,
but because he believes that
Love conquereth all the children of Darkness.
Hence the burden of his message
is the ever-recurring, Brethren, follow Christ!
Follow Christ with your heads, and your
metaphysics will take care of themselves;
follow Christ with your will, and your passions
will take care of themselves; follow
Christ with your hopes, and your self-respect
will take care of itself; lastly, follow Christ
with your hands, and your work will take care
of itself. Tolstoy's book is therefore only
the fifth gospel of Christ, and Tolstoy himself
is therefore only the thirteenth apostle of
Jesus.
7. I must emphasize this fact, my friends,
because church-societies are still discussing
the propriety of admitting his book into their
libraries; I must emphasize this fact, because
hitherto not one preacher of the gospel of
Christ has yet ventured to utter one word of
greeting, one word of fellowship, to Tolstoy.
I must emphasize this fact, because Tolstoy
having forsaken art and having betaken
himself to the cobbling of shoes, the wise
world, that ever knoweth the duty of another
better than he doth himself, is forthwith
at hand with its estimate, its disapproval,
its condemnation. Turgenef therefore gently
remonstrates with his fellow-craftsman for his
new departure, and beseeches him to return
to the forsaken higher field,—to the art of
amusing folk already over-amused. The Rev.
Mr. Savage, the only servant of God in
the pulpits of this great God-fearing city
who has even dared to make Tolstoy the subject
of a Sunday discourse, respects indeed
his character, but boldly declares the man
Tolstoy and his Master Jesus of Nazareth to
have been teaching impracticable teachings;
 impracticable, indeed, in an age when bank-stock
and a grandfather, and foam and froth,
and social fireworks are the only acceptable
signs of strength. Mr. Savage, however, follows
at least Pope's direction, and damns
with faint praise, while that wee, tiny manikin
from that State of Indiana does not even
think this necessary, and therefore, standing
on tiptoe, screeches at the top of his voicelet
to Tolstoy, “Crank, crank!”
8. But what if in God's eyes there be no
higher work, nor lower work, but merely work?
What if in God's eyes there be no higher duty,
nor lower duty, but merely duty? If it be
necessary to chop wood, and sift ashes, and
mend shoes, wherefore should this be a lower
occupation than to thump on the piano, and
read poetry, and write books, and even listen
unto lectures? But the artist is held in
higher esteem than the house-drudge! What,
then! shalt thou make the esteem of thy fellows,
which is as changeable as the wind, thy
motive for doing, rather than the esteem of
thyself, thy conscience, thy God? To do all
we ought, be it never so humble, this is doing
 the highest work, God's work. But chopping
wood and mending shoes brings no recognition,
no esteem, no applause in gorgeously-lighted
parlors, as does the reading and the
singing and the writing for select audiences.
What, shalt thou do thy duty for the sake of
the reward, the mess of pottage it brings, O
wretch?