5. Turgenef, then, is the fighter. This accounts
for what is otherwise a strange phenomenon
in Turgenef's art. In his “Memoirs
of a Sportsman,” in which he first aimed his
blows consciously against serfdom, his muse
busies itself not with life normal, but with
life abnormal; not with every-day characters,
 but with such as are seen rarely; not with frequented
places, but with unfrequented places.
The “Memoirs of a Sportsman” is a collection
of sketches which form a sort of variety
museum of all manner of bizarre and even
grotesque figures. Critics naturally marvelled
at this; and as in the days of old, men explained
the effects of morphine by saying
that it contained the soporific principle, and
the action of the pump by nature's abhorring
a vacuum, so critics explained this fact, so
strange in the healthy, clear-eyed, measure-loving
Turgenef, by saying that he had a natural
fondness for the fantastic and the strange.
In truth, however, the choice of his subjects
was part of his very art as a warrior. He
wished to strike, to rouse; and here the extraordinary
is ever more effective than the ordinary.
It was the same design which made
the otherwise generous, tender Wendell Phillips
adopt a personal mode of warfare in his
struggle against slavery with a bitterness almost
Mephistophelian. And the same purpose
made Turgenef, against the dictates of
his muse, choose strange characters for his
 sketches. Both Phillips and Turgenef here
sacrificed their feelings to their cause: the
one sacrificed to his purpose even his love
for his fellow-men; the other, even his love
for his art.
6. One other strange fact in the art of Turgenef
is explained by this fighting essence of
his being. There is no growth, development,
visible in Turgenef. He lived to what is for
Russian men of letters an advanced age: he
died when over sixty years old; yet, beginning
with his first great work of art, “Rudin,” and
ending with his last great work of art, “Virgin
Soil,” through all his masterpieces, he
remains the same. His six great novels,
“Rudin,” “A Nest of Noblemen,” “On the
Eve,” “Fathers and Sons,” “Smoke,” and
“Virgin Soil,” form indeed an ascending
scale, but not as works of art; as such, they
are all on the same highest plane. And it
would be difficult to find any canon of art
according to which one could be placed
above the other. Only when viewed as different
modes of warfare, do they represent
the different stages of his soul's life; but this
 only in so far as they reflect at the same time
the state of the enemy's forces, against whom
he found it necessary to re-equip himself
from time to time. As an artist, then, Turgenef
is not progressive; when his art comes
to him, it comes like Minerva from Jupiter's
head,—fully made, fully armed; and had it
even come undeveloped, it would have had, in
his case, to remain thus. For growth, development,
needs time, needs leisure, needs reflection,
needs rest; and of all this, on the
field of battle, there is none to be had. Onward
or backward, conquer or perish, but
stand still on the field of battle thou must not.
And while it was not given to Turgenef
to conquer, neither was it given to the enemy
to conquer him. Turgenef, therefore, as he
lived a fighter, so he died a fighter.
7. Turgenef, then, had a life-long enemy;
this enemy was Russian autocracy.
8. Born in 1818, in the same year with the
autocrat of Russia, who afterwards dreaded
him as his bête noir, he already in his childhood
had the opportunity to learn the weight
of the iron hand of Nicolas. Scarcely was
 he seven years old when the news came to
his father's household that the family name
so dear to them, and hitherto a synonym of
honor both in and out of Russia, had been disgraced;
that Nicolai Turgenef, one of the
most faithful servants of the country under
Alexander I., the younger of the two celebrated
brothers, and a near relative of Ivan,
had been sentenced to Siberian hard labor for
life,—sentenced under circumstances which
could not but shock the sense of justice not
only of the trustful boy, but also of those
whom maturer age had accustomed to the
methods of the government. Nicolai Turgenef
was condemned as one of the Decembrists,
and the days of the youth of Ivan were
the days when the Decembrists were looked
up to as the first martyrs of Russian liberty.
Pushkin, the friend of the leaders of the insurrection,
and the singer of the “Ode to Liberty,”
was then worshipped by the youth of
Russia as poet was worshipped never before;
to be related to the Decembrists was therefore
a privilege, and to oppose autocracy in
thought at least thus became a kind of family
 pride. Moreover, contrary to most Russian
aristocrats, Sergei Turgenef conducted the
early education of his gifted son himself; and
the son of the conscientious father, when taken
out into the world, could not but feel the
discord between the peaceful life, rigid conduct,
and high ideals of his home on the one
hand, and the gloomy struggle for existence,
lax morals of the officials, and the low standards
of the world about him on the other.
When Turgenef therefore was introduced into
society, he was already saturated with revolutionary
ideas, and it was not long before he
found the atmosphere of his native land stifling;
and already, at the age of nineteen, he
had to face the question whether to stay and
endure, or—to flee. The boy of nineteen
cannot endure; go then from Russia he
must, but go—whither? Fortunately, just
beyond the western border there lay a country
which had already proved the promised
land of others equally defiant with Turgenef.
Germany already harbored Stankevitch, Granofsky,
Katkof, and Bakunin. The youth of
Russia of those days had metaphorically
 cried to the Germans what a thousand years
before them the Slavs had cried literally to
the Varangians: “Our land is wide, and overflowing
with abundance; but of order in it
there is none. Come ye, therefore; and rule
over us, and restore order among us!” Germany
thus became the land of milk and
honey for the Russians hungry in spirit.
Whatever had any ambition looked to a
visit to Germany with the same longing
with which a Mohammedan looks to the
shrines of Mecca.
9. Berlin was the first halting-station of
the pilgrims; Böck was lecturing there on
Greek literature, Zumpt on Roman antiquities,
and Werder was expounding the philosophy
of the man who boasted or complained
of being understood by only one man, and
that one misunderstood him. To these masters
in the education of hair-splitting flocked
almost all who became celebrated afterwards
in Russia's public life, and even the government
was sending students to Berlin at public
expense. To these masters Turgenef also
went, hearing Greek literature and Roman antiquities
 by day, and committing to memory
the elements of Greek and Latin grammar
by night. For in the Russian university,
where Turgenef had hitherto spent two years,
the professors were appointed not because of
their knowledge of Latin and Greek, but because
of their knowledge of military tactics.